---
layout: post
title: Reinstall python and Mkdocs-material
date: 2023-04-22
categories: Eng
tags:
  - Python
  - Mkdocs-material
---

Now you've reinstalled MacOS and python, and synced all site content. 
The next step is to create a virtual environment called the same name as before, for example, the name "virtualName".

You remember for creating a virtual environment, you could use the latest version of the python. However, `mkdocs-material` works compatibly with python3.11 at of late 2024. It might has fixed this issue for later versions, but version 3.11 has been verified to work well with `mkdocs-material`.

<p class="highlight green" markdown="1">The latest version of `mkdocs-material` has solve this compatibility issue. You are free to install any python versions.</p>

## Unable to install `mkdocs-material`

You entered the "virtualName" environment using the following code:

```js
source virtualName/bin/activate
```

Now you want to reinstall `mkdocs-material` to run the site locally. As usual, you follow the instruction online, and type:

```python
pip install mkdocs-material
```

**Nothing happened!**

Then you realize that you didn't delete the previous folder of "virtualName", but covered it with a new virtual environment. Somehow you figured out that was the problem. **Now you delete the folder completely and reinstall the virtual environment.** You repeat the steps above. 

Bada-bing!

The `mkdocs-material` starts installing itself in the virtual environment.

You don't build the site from scratch, because all content has been there for you. What you need to do is just serve the site locally. For that purpose, you type:

```python
mkdocs serve
```

It starts building the site and serving at localhost. 

You wrote some posts. You want to save and push them to github. Now you will encounter another issue, the git push has not been set yet. To do it right, you need to type the follow codes:

```js
git config --global user.name "Your Name"
git config --global user.email "your_email@example.com"
```

Here `user.name` is the name of your github account, and `user.email` is your github email address.

Now you can save and push what you modify locally to github. 

Everything is set! You are good to go!


## no auto re-serve

It has been bugging me for almost a week. On the reinstalled MBP-2015, auto re-serve didn't work on save.

After re-installing the system and tried numerous methods but failed, finally, I came across a way to solve this issue. 

Usually, I use `mkdocs serve` to start the workflow but no auto re-serve. The solution is quite simple and strait-forward:

```js
mkdocs serve --livereload
```

I don't know why in previous versions, `--livereload` was not necessary for auto re-serve, but it did solve the issue. 


