---
layout: post
title: L505 Unit 3
date: 2025-10-03
draft: false
categories:
  - Law
tags:
  - "LAW 505: Canadian Public Law"
  - Unit 3
---

# The Canadian Constitution

<p class="highlight green" markdown="1">Constitutional law is the law prescribing **the exercise of power by the organs of a State**. It explains which organs can exercise legislative power (making new laws), executive power (implementing the laws) and judicial power (adjudicating disputes), and what the limitations on those powers are.<br> In a federal state, **the allocation of governmental powers (legislative, executive and judicial) among central and regional (state or provincial) authorities** is a basic concern.<br> **Civil liberties** are also part of constitutional law, because civil liberties may be created by the rules that limit the exercise of governmental power over individuals.</p>

## 3.1 Introduction to the Canadian Constitution

!!! note "Readings"

    Constitutional Law: Chapter 1 (pp. **3-12**) Parts I to VI inclusive

In 1995, the government of **Quebec** held a referendum on Quebec sovereignty. The federalist side won by a very slim majority (50.6% to 49.4%). As part of the political response to this referendum, the federal government referred a number of questions to the Supreme Court of Canada. Those questions were:

- Under the **Constitution of Canada**, can the National Assembly, legislature or government of Quebec effect the secession of Quebec from Canada unilaterally?
- Does international law give the National Assembly, legislature or government of Quebec the right to effect the secession of Quebec from Canada unilaterally? In this regard, is there **a right to self‑determination under international law** that would give the National Assembly, legislature or government of Quebec the right to effect the secession of Quebec from Canada unilaterally?
- In the event of a conflict between domestic and international law on the right of the National Assembly, legislature or government of Quebec to effect the secession of Quebec from Canada unilaterally, **which would take precedence** in Canada?

The Supreme Court of Canada responded in a very important judgment referred to as the [_Quebec Secession Reference_, [1998] 2 SCR 217](https://canlii.ca/t/1fqr3){:target=" \_blank"}.

!!! note "Readings"

    Constitutional Law: pages **30-39**.

The Canadian Constitution encompasses five components:

- **Parliamentary democracy** is the mechanism that ensures that primary legal rules (statutes) are created by elected legislative bodies.
- **Federalism** is the division of “orders of government” along territorial lines. In Canada, federalism’s most critical function is to allocate the powers of different legislatures: Parliament at the national level and assemblies/legislatures at the provincial level.
- **Rights**: claims that citizens, either individually or in particular communities, have against the state.
- **Aboriginal rights**, are recognized by the Constitution as belonging to Indigenous peoples in light of the fact that they lived on this continent in organized societies long before their contact with European nations.
- **constitutionalism** refers to the requirement that state power be limited by overarching rules and norms that cannot be changed by ordinary legislative processes. Another feature of the Constitution is the **rule of law**, an expansive, complex, and challenging concept. At its most basic, the rule of law means that **governments exercise power according to law, not arbitrarily**.

!!! note "Readings"

    - The Supreme Court of Canada revisited the test for the granting of public interest standing in *Canada (Attorney General) v. Downtown Eastside Sex Workers United Against Violence Society*, [2012 SCC 45](https://canlii.ca/t/fss7s){:target=" \_blank"} (“***DESUAV***”) case.
    - [2] In exercising their discretion with respect to standing, the courts weigh three factors in light of these underlying purposes and of the particular circumstances. The courts consider whether the case raises **a serious justiciable issue**, whether the party bringing the action has **a real stake or a genuine interest** in its outcome and whether, having regard to a number of factors, the proposed suit is **a reasonable and effective means** to bring the case to court.
        - **Serious Justiciable Issue:** [42] To constitute a “serious issue”, the question raised must be a “substantial constitutional issue” or an “important one”. The claim must be “far from frivolous”, although courts should not examine the merits of the case in other than a preliminary manner.
        - **The Nature of the Plaintiff’s Interest:** [43] In my view, this factor is concerned with whether the plaintiff has a real stake in the proceedings or is engaged with the issues they raise. In *Finlay*, for example, although the plaintiff did not in the Court’s view have standing as of right, he nonetheless had a direct, personal interest in the issues he sought to raise. In *Borowski*, the Court found that the plaintiff had a genuine interest in challenging the exculpatory provisions regarding abortion. He was a concerned citizen and taxpayer and he had sought unsuccessfully to have the issue determined by other means...
        - **Reasonable and Effective Means of Bringing the Issue Before the Court:** [52] This factor, like the other two, must be assessed in a flexible and purposive manner and weighed in light of the other factors.
    - [3] ... The appeal raises one main question: whether the three factors which courts are to consider in deciding the standing issue are to be treated as **a rigid checklist** or as considerations to be taken into account and weighed in exercising judicial discretion in a way that **serves the underlying purposes of the law of standing**. In my view, the latter approach is the right one.
    - [22] ... The Court has recognized that, in a constitutional democracy like Canada with a Charter of Rights and Freedoms, there are occasions when **public interest litigation is an appropriate vehicle to bring matters of public interest and importance before the courts**.

How do constitutional cases come before the courts in Canada? In short, there are **three** main ways:

- The government may launch a “**reference**” asking the Court for an “advisory opinion” on a constitutional issue (e.g. the Quebec Secession Reference);
- Where a party is directly affected either by a law (e.g. they are charged with a crime) or government action, they may **argue that the law (or government action) is unconstitutional**; or
- Where a party is not directly affected by a law (or government action), they may seek “**public interest standing**” to challenge the constitutionality of the law or government action.

## 3.2 Constitutional Interpretation

!!! note "Readings"

    Constitutional Law: Chapter 2 (pp. 19-29)

Interpreting the provisions of a constitutional text raises many complex issues, including:

- the intentions of the drafters
- the role of the constitution in framing political practices and institutions
- community identity and shared values


Forms of constitutional argumentation include historical, textual, doctrinal, prudential, ethical and structural.

!!! note "Example: Persons Case"

    - ***Edwards v. Canada (Attorney General)***, [1929 CanLII 438](https://canlii.ca/t/gbvs4){:target=" \_blank"}
    - Does the word "person" in s. 24 of the *British North America Act* include *female persons*?
    - Chief Justice Anglin of the SCC: **No**
        - stability, continuity
        - historical and doctrinal arguments
    - Lord Sankey of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council: **Yes**
        - evolution, adaptability
        - textural and ethical arguments
    - both judges
        - agree that, as a matter of interpretation, the word "persons" is ambiguous
        - describe women's dis-entitlement in paternalistic terms
        - deny that the judgement involves political evaluation of the desirability of women senators or the consequences of women's equality
        - have a complex relationship to the demands of democracy

**Unit Conclusion**

The historical and legal frameworks introduced in this Unit play an important role in shaping all aspects of Canadian constitutional law.  As we saw in the *Quebec Secession Reference*, some of the most important constitutional questions have to do with the relationships between the federal and provincial/territorial governments, and the role of courts in moderating those relationships.  




