---
layout: post
title: L505 Unit 6
date: 2025-11-20
draft: false
categories:
  - Law
tags:
  - "LAW 505: Canadian Public Law"
  - Unit 6
---

# Aboriginal Law and the Canadian Constitution

Indigenous legal traditions are one of the legal inheritances that make up Canada's pluralistic system of law.  In this Unit, we will engage with those aspects of Canadian public law that arise from Aboriginal law and the rights of Aboriginal peoples.  This includes consideration of s. 35 of the *Constitution Act*, which explicitly recognizes Aboriginal rights, thus bringing Aboriginal rights and some Aboriginal legal traditions into direct conversation with Canadian constitutional law.

In this course, “**Indigenous**” is sometimes used, especially when engaging with scholars who use this term, and “**Aboriginal**” is used when discussing s. 35 of the constitution, reflecting the language found there.

## 6.1 Introduction to Aboriginal law and Aboriginal rights

!!! note "Readings"

    - Read the [following introduction](https://indigenousfoundations.arts.ubc.ca/land__rights/){:target=" \_blank"} to Aboriginal rights. 
    - Constitutional Law: Chapter 14 - pp. 543-561 (Parts I to III)
    - Constitutional Law: Chapter 14 (pp. 561-587)

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">**Module Content**</p>

Aboriginal rights were entrenched in Canada's constitution in 1982.  S. 35 reads as follows:

> s. 35 (1) The existing aboriginal and treaty rights of the aboriginal peoples of Canada are hereby recognized and affirmed.

> (2) In this Act, "aboriginal peoples of Canada" includes the Indian, Inuit and Métis peoples of Canada.

> (3) For greater certainty, in subsection (1) "treaty rights" includes rights that now exist by way of land claims agreements or may be so acquired.

> (4) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the aboriginal and treaty rights referred to in subsection (1) are guaranteed equally to male and female persons.

There are three things to notice immediately about the text of s. 35.

- First, it does not create Aboriginal rights, but only recognizes and affirms those rights.  This relates to the idea that the *Constitution Act* is not necessarily the source of Aboriginal rights, but rather the medium through which **existing Aboriginal law can be made part of Canadian constitutional law**.  In this way, s. 35 opens debates about the relationship between Canadian and Indigenous legal orders, as well as the legal consequences of Canada's colonial history.
- Second, s. 35 recognizes and affirms existing aboriginal and treaty rights.  Thus, the section creates for courts the task of interpreting what rights are “existing,” and what is required in order for it to be adequately recognized and affirmed.
- Third, despite the enormous diversity of indigenous peoples in Canada, s. 35 recognizes only three categories of aboriginal people: “**Indian**,” “**Inuit**” and “**Métis**.” The text of s. 35 thus requires courts to engage with questions about the boundaries of communities and the proper sources of knowledge to ground judgments about who is Aboriginal for the purposes of constitutional law.

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">Textbook Summary</p>

Despite the diversity that exists among the first peoples of Canada, the text of s 35(2) of the *Constitution Act*, 1982 makes only three distinctions among Aboriginal peoples (as Indigenous peoples are labelled in that text): the **Indian**, **Inuit**, and **Métis**.

The federal government has maintained the term “Indian” as a category to recognize certain Indigenous people as holding status under its *Indian Act*, RSC 1985, c I-5. In 2019 there were 1,008,955 registered status Indians in Canada. This number had grown from 670,000 in 2000. First Nations people who are not registered by the government under federal procedures are referred to as non-status Indians.

There is no federal Inuit registry, and thus the status/non-status distinction does not exist in this group.

The Métis originally formed as the result of 19th-century unions between male fur traders and primarily Indigenous women on the Canadian plains; this population of mixed ancestry forged a common cultural, political, and ethnic identity.

**COMMON LAW FOUNDATIONS OF CONSTITUTIONAL RECOGNITION**

Constitutional law in relation to Indigenous peoples has become an amalgam of different legal sources. Its doctrines are informed by, *inter alia*, the traditional laws and customs of Indigenous peoples, French and British colonial practice, executive proclamations, British legislative action, treaties, Privy Council rulings and decisions of the senior appellate courts of the United States and Australia, international law, and various sections of the *British North America Acts* and *Constitution Act*, 1982.

Most, if not all, constitutional issues involving Indigenous peoples occur against the back-drop of Aboriginal rights with respect to land.

The *Royal Proclamation* of 1763 stipulated that “lands and territories not included within the limits of [the governments created under the Royal Proclamation, including that of Quebec], or within the limits of the territory granted to the Hudson’s Bay Company” be reserved under the King’s protection and dominion for the use of the Indians.

Until the Supreme Court of Canada’s decision in ***Calder et al. v. Attorney-General of British Columbia***, [1973 CanLII 4 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1nfn4){:target=" \_blank"}, the Royal Proclamation was generally viewed by the judiciary as the sole Anglo–Canadian legal source of Indigenous rights.

An **exception** to this idea of the source of Indigenous rights lay with the famous decision by Monk J in ***Connolly v. Woolrich and Johnson et al.***, [1867 CanLII 13 (QC CS)](https://canlii.ca/t/k8t1q){:target=" \_blank"}, discussed below in an excerpt from a report by the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples.

!!! info "Canada, Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples"

    - In support of his claim, John Connolly argued that the marriage between his mother and William Connolly was valid under Cree law and that the couple had been in “community of property,” so that each partner to the marriage was entitled to one-half of their jointly owned property. When William died, only his half-share of the property could be left to Julia, with the other half passing automatically to Suzanne as his lawful wife. On Suzanne’s death, her children would be entitled to inherit her share of the estate, now in the hands of Julia. 
    - It held that the Cree marriage between Suzanne and William was valid and that their eldest son was entitled to his rightful share of the estate.
    - the British Crown did not interfere with the domestic affairs of its Indian allies and dependencies, so that they remained self-governing in internal matters. This decision portrays Aboriginal peoples as **autonomous nations** living within the protection of the Crown but retaining their territorial rights, political organizations and common laws. 
    - The doctrine of Aboriginal rights is not a modern innovation, invented by courts to remedy injustices perpetrated in the past. ... [T]he doctrine was reflected in the numerous **treaties** of peace and friendship concluded in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries between Aboriginal peoples and the French and British Crowns. Aboriginal rights are also apparent in the *Royal Proclamation of 1763* and other instruments of the same period, and in the **treaties** signed in Ontario, the west, and the northwest during the late nineteenth and early twentieth century. 

In 1884, in a case called ***Guerin v. The Queen***, [1984 CanLII 25 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1lpfn){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada agreed with Hall J and found that **Indian title was an independent legal interest** which predated and survived in spite of Crown assertions of sovereignty. Only Dickson J discussed the **nature of Indian interests in land** as it relates to governmental obligations.

!!! info "*Guerin v. The Queen*, [1984 CanLII 25 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1lpfn){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - In recognizing that the Proclamation is not the sole source of Indian title the ***Calder*** decision **went beyond** the judgment of the Privy Council in ***St. Catherine’s Milling & Lumber Co. v. The Queen (1888)***, 14 App. Cas. 46. In this respect ***Calder*** is consistent with the position of Chief Justice Marshall in the leading American cases of ***Johnson v. M’Intosh, 8 Wheaton 543 (1823)***, and ***Worcester v. State of Georgia, 6 Peters 515 (1832)***.
    - In ***Johnson v. M’Intosh***, **Marshall C.J.**, although he acknowledged the Proclamation of 1763 as one basis for recognition of Indian title, was none the less of [the] opinion that the rights of Indians in the lands they traditionally occupied prior to European colonization both **predated** and **survived** the claims to sovereignty made by various European nations in the territories of the North American continent. 
    - Indians have a legal right to occupy and possess certain lands, the ultimate title to which is in the Crown. While their interest does not, strictly speaking, amount to beneficial ownership, neither is its nature completely exhausted by the concept of a personal right. 
    - It is true that the ***sui generis*** interest which the Indians have in the land is personal in the sense that it cannot be transferred to a grantee, but it is also true, as will presently appear, that the interest gives rise upon surrender to a distinctive fiduciary obligation on the part of the Crown to deal with the land for the benefit of the surrendering Indians. 

In ***Guerin***, Dickson CJ interpreted Calder as deriving common law Aboriginal title from Indigenous peoples’ historic occupation and possession of their ancestral lands. No mention is made of ***Connolly v Woolrich*** or the possibility that Indigenous legal systems might be the source of Aboriginal rights.

**THE CONSTITUTIONAL ENTRENCHMENT OF ABORIGINAL RIGHTS**

Aboriginal and treaty rights were entrenched in Canada’s newly patriated *Constitution Act* in 1982, as part II of that instrument, outside its Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

Section 35(1) protects these rights by stating that 

> the existing aboriginal and treaty rights of the aboriginal peoples of Canada are hereby recognized and affirmed.

The problem with this language was that no one was quite sure what Aboriginal and treaty rights existed as of that date, and therefore what, if anything, was being protected. 

!!! info "*R. v. Sparrow*, [1990 CanLII 104 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fsvj){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - This appeal requires this Court to explore for the first time the **scope** of s. 35(1) of the *Constitution Act*, 1982, and to indicate its strength as a promise to the aboriginal peoples of Canada.
    - The word “**existing**” makes it clear that the rights to which s. 35(1) applies are those that were in existence when the *Constitution Act*, 1982 came into effect. This means that extinguished rights are not revived by the Constitution Act, 1982. ... [T]he phrase “existing aboriginal rights” must be interpreted flexibly so as to permit their evolution over time. ... [A]n approach to the constitutional guarantee embodied in s. 35(1) which would incorporate “frozen rights” must be rejected.
    - That the right is **controlled** in great detail by the regulations does not mean that the right is thereby **extinguished**. ... The **test of extinguishment** to be adopted, in our opinion, is that the **Sovereign’s intention must be clear and plain** if it is to extinguish an aboriginal right.
    - The nature of s. 35(1) itself suggests that it be **construed in a purposive way**. When the purposes of the affirmation of aboriginal rights are considered, it is clear that a generous, liberal interpretation of the words in the constitutional provision is demanded.
    - In ***Nowegijick v. The Queen***, [1983 CanLII 18 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1lpd4){:target=" \_blank"} at p. 36, the following principle that should govern the interpretation of Indian treaties and statutes was set out:
        - ... [T]reaties and statutes relating to Indians should be liberally construed and doubtful expressions resolved in favour of the Indians. 
    - In ***R. v. Agawa***, [1988 CanLII 148 (ON CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/1npn7){:target=" \_blank"}, Blair J.A. stated that the above principle should apply to the interpretation of s. 35(1).
    - [I]t is true that s. 35(1) is **not subject to s. 1** of the *Charter*. In our opinion, this does not mean that any law or regulation affecting aboriginal rights will automatically be of no force or effect by the operation of s. 52 of the Constitution Act, 1982.
    - Federal legislative powers continue, including, of course, the right to legislate with respect to Indians pursuant to s. 91(24) of the *Constitution Act*, 1867. ... federal power must be reconciled with federal duty and the best way to achieve that reconciliation is to demand the justification of any government regulation that infringes upon or denies aboriginal rights.
    - The extent of legislative or regulatory impact on an existing aboriginal right may be scrutinized so as to ensure recognition and affirmation. 
    - **Test for justification of s. 35(1) interference**
    - The **first question** to be asked is whether the legislation in question has the effect of interfering with an existing aboriginal right. If it does have such an effect, it represents a *prima facie* infringement of s. 35(1). 
    - To determine whether [aboriginal rights] have been interfered with such as to constitute a *prima facie* infringement of s. 35(1), certain questions must be asked. 
        - First, is the limitation unreasonable? 
        - Second, does the regulation impose undue hardship? 
        - Third, does the regulation deny to the holders of the right their preferred means of exercising that right? 
    - The onus of proving a *prima facie* infringement lies on the individual or group challenging the legislation.
    - If a *prima facie* interference is found, the **analysis moves to the issue of justification**.
        - First, is there a valid legislative objective?
        - If a valid legislative objective is found, the analysis proceeds to the **second part** of the justification issue. Here, ... the guiding interpretive principle [is that] ... the honour of the Crown is at stake in dealings with aboriginal peoples. The special trust relationship and the responsibility of the government vis-à-vis aboriginals must be the first consideration in determining whether the legislation or action in question can be justified. 
        - Within the analysis of justification, there are further questions to be addressed, depending on the circumstances of the inquiry. These include the questions of 
            - whether there has been as little infringement as possible in order to effect the desired result; 
            - whether, in a situation of expropriation, fair compensation is available; and 
            - whether the aboriginal group in question has been consulted with respect to the conservation measures being implemented. 

The Court in ***Sparrow*** did not provide detailed reasons why fishing was an Aboriginal right. 

In ***Sparrow***, the Court acknowledged that there was no explicit language in s 35 to authorize an assessment of the legitimacy of any governmental action that might restrict Aboriginal rights.


!!! info "*R. v. Van der Peet*, [1996 CanLII 216 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fr8r){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - [15] ... at the heart of this appeal: How should the aboriginal rights **recognized and affirmed** by s. 35(1) of the *Constitution Act*, 1982 be defined? 
    - [17] Section 35(1), it is true, recognizes and affirms existing aboriginal rights, but it must not be forgotten that the **rights** it recognizes and affirms are **aboriginal**. 
    - [21] The way to accomplish this task is, as was noted at the outset, through a **purposive approach** to s. 35(1). ... a purposive approach to s. 35(1) will ensure that that which is found to fall within the provision is related to the provision’s intended focus: **aboriginal **people and their rights in relation to Canadian society as a whole. 
    - [23] Before turning to a purposive analysis of s. 35(1), however, it should be noted that such analysis must take place in light of the **general principles** which apply to the legal relationship between the Crown and aboriginal peoples. In ***R v Sparrow***, this Court held at p. 1106 that s. 35(1) should be given **a generous and liberal interpretation in favour of aboriginal peoples**.
    - [31] More specifically, what s. 35(1) does is provide the constitutional framework through which the fact that aboriginals lived on the land in distinctive societies, with their own practices, traditions and cultures, is **acknowledged and reconciled** with the sovereignty of the Crown. The substantive rights which fall within the provision must be defined in light of this **purpose**.
    - **The Test for Identifying Aboriginal Rights in Section 35(1)**
    - [44] In order to fulfil the **purpose** underlying s. 35(1), i.e., **the protection and reconciliation of the interests which arise from the fact that prior to the arrival of Europeans in North America aboriginal peoples lived on the land in distinctive societies, with their own practices, customs and traditions**, the test for identifying [aboriginal rights ...] must be directed at identifying the crucial elements of those pre-existing distinctive societies.
    - [46] In light of the suggestion of ***Sparrow***, and the purposes underlying s. 35(1), the following **test** should be used to identify whether an applicant has established an aboriginal right protected by s. 35(1): 
        - **in order to be an aboriginal right an activity must be an element of a practice, custom or tradition integral to the distinctive culture of the aboriginal group claiming the right.** 
    - **Factors to Be Considered** in Application of the Integral to a Distinctive Culture Test
    - [49] In assessing a claim for the existence of an aboriginal right, a court must take into account the **perspective of the aboriginal people** claiming the right. 
    - [52] ... The **nature** of an applicant’s claim must be delineated in terms of the particular practice, custom or tradition under which it is claimed.
    - [55] The claimant must demonstrate that the practice, custom or tradition was **a central and significant part** of the society’s distinctive culture. He or she must demonstrate, in other words, that the practice, custom or tradition was one of the things which made the culture of the society distinctive, that it was one of the things that **truly made the society what it was**.
    - [60] The time period that a court should consider ... is the **period prior to contact** between aboriginal and European societies. Because it is the fact that distinctive aboriginal societies lived on the land prior to the arrival of Europeans that underlies the aboriginal rights protected by s. 35(1), it is to that **pre-contact period that the courts must look in identifying aboriginal rights**.
    - [63] ... Where an aboriginal community can demonstrate that a particular practice, custom or tradition is integral to its distinctive culture today, and that this practice, custom or tradition has **continuity** with the practices, customs and traditions of pre-contact times, that community will have demonstrated that the practice, custom or tradition is an aboriginal right for the purposes of s. 35(1). 
    - [65] I would note that the concept of continuity **does not require** aboriginal groups to provide evidence of **an unbroken chain of continuity** between their current practices, customs and traditions, and those which existed prior to contact. 
    - [68] ... a court should approach the rules of evidence, and interpret the evidence that exists, with **a consciousness of the special nature** of aboriginal claims, and of the **evidentiary difficulties**. The courts must not undervalue the evidence presented by aboriginal claimants simply because that evidence does not conform precisely with the evidentiary standards that would be applied in, for example, a private law torts case.
    - [69] ... [T]he existence of an aboriginal right will depend entirely on the practices, customs and traditions of the **particular aboriginal community claiming the right**. ... The fact that one group of aboriginal people has an aboriginal right to do a particular thing will not be, without something more, sufficient to demonstrate that another aboriginal community has the same aboriginal right.
    - [70] In identifying those practices, customs and traditions that constitute the aboriginal rights recognized and affirmed by s. 35(1), a court must ensure that the practice, custom or tradition relied upon in a particular case is **independently significant** to the aboriginal community claiming the right.
    - [71] The standard which a practice, custom or tradition must meet in order to be recognized as an aboriginal right is not that it be **distinct** to the aboriginal culture in question; the aboriginal claimants must simply demonstrate that the practice, custom or tradition is **distinctive**. 
        - A culture with a **distinct** tradition must claim that in having such a tradition it is different from other cultures;
        - By contrast, a culture that claims that a practice, custom or tradition is **distinctive**, is rather one about the culture’s own practices, customs or traditions considered apart from the practices, customs or traditions of any other culture. It is a claim that this tradition or custom makes the culture what it is, not that the practice, custom or tradition is different from the practices, customs or traditions of another culture. 
    - [73] ... where the practice, custom or tradition arose solely as a response to European influences then that practice, custom or tradition will not meet the standard for recognition of an aboriginal right.
    - [74] ... **aboriginal title** is a **sub-category of aboriginal rights** which deals solely with claims of rights to land. The relationship between aboriginal title and aboriginal rights must not, however, confuse the analysis of what constitutes an aboriginal right. Aboriginal rights arise from the prior occupation of land, but they also arise from the prior social organization and distinctive cultures of aboriginal peoples on that land.

Requiring Aboriginal rights to manifest continuity with practices, customs, and traditions that existed prior to contact raises conceptual problems with respect to **Métis** rights recognized by s 35(1), given that **Métis** peoples are post-contact communities: see ***R. v. Powley***, [2003 SCC 43](https://canlii.ca/t/51pd){:target=" \_blank"}. 

!!! info "*R. v. Gladstone*, [1996 CanLII 160 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fr8w){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - [54] In ***R v Sparrow***, Dickson CJ and La Forest J articulated a **two-part test** for determining whether government actions infringing aboriginal rights can be justified.
    - [59] ... in the circumstance where the aboriginal right has no internal limitation, the notion of priority, as articulated in ***Sparrow***, would mean that where an aboriginal right is recognized and affirmed that right would become an exclusive one.

## 6.2 Aboriginal Title

!!! note "Readings"

    - Constitutional Law: Chapter 14 (pp. 594-612)
    - the Introduction (pp. 1-21) from Bruce Granville Miller, *Oral History on Trial* (UBC Press, 2011).

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">**Module Content**</p>

the question of Aboriginal “title” to land is very important, particularly in those parts of Canada where there are no treaties.

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">Textbook Summary</p>

in 2014, the Supreme Court of Canada granted its first declaration of Aboriginal title in ***Tsilhqot’in Nation v. British Columbia***, [2014 SCC 44](https://canlii.ca/t/g7mt9){:target=" \_blank"}. 

historically, one of the primary methods to deal with Aboriginal title has been the signing of treaties following the principles outlined and agreed to in the *Royal Proclamation of 1763*. However, there were places in Canada where these principles were not followed, and land was not the subject of treaty promises. These areas include the **Maritimes**, **parts of the North**, **southern Quebec**, and **British Columbia**. The existence of Aboriginal title is a contemporary issue in these areas.

the issue of Aboriginal title in British Columbia did not appear before the courts until the early 1970s in the ***Calder*** case and did not receive any treatment under s 35(1) until the groundbreaking case of ***Delgamuukw v British Columbia***, immediately below.

!!! info "*Delgamuukw v. British Columbia*, [1997 CanLII 302 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fqz8){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - **What Is the Ability of This Court to Interfere with the Factual Findings Made by the Trial Judge?**
    - [82] ... [A]lthough the doctrine of aboriginal rights is a common law doctrine, aboriginal rights are truly *sui generis*, and demand a unique approach to the treatment of evidence which accords due weight to the perspective of aboriginal peoples. However, that accommodation must be done in a manner which does not strain “the Canadian legal and constitutional structure” [***R v Van der Peet***, [1996] 2 SCR 507, 1996 CanLII 216] (at para. 49).
    - Many features of oral histories would count against both their **admissibility** and their **weight** as evidence of prior events in a court that took a traditional approach to the rules of evidence. ... Notwithstanding the challenges created by the use of oral histories as proof of historical facts, the laws of evidence must be adapted in order that this type of evidence can be accommodated and placed on an equal footing with the types of historical evidence that courts are familiar with. (paras 86-87)
    - **What Is the Content of Aboriginal Title, How Is it Protected by Section 35(1) of the *Constitution Act*, 1982, and What Is Required for its Proof?**
    - [111] The content of **aboriginal title** ... is a right in land and, as such, is more than the right to engage in specific activities which may be themselves aboriginal rights. ... [I]t confers the right to use land for a variety of activities, **not all** of which need be aspects of practices, customs and traditions which are integral to the distinctive cultures of aboriginal societies. Those activities do not constitute the right *per se*; rather, they are parasitic on the underlying title. 
        - However, that range of uses is subject to the **limitation** that they must not be irreconcilable with the nature of the attachment to the land which forms the basis of the particular group’s aboriginal title. This inherent limit ... flows from the definition of aboriginal title as a *sui generis* interest in land, and is one way in which **aboriginal title is distinct from a fee simple**.
    - The idea that aboriginal title is *sui generis* is the unifying principle underlying the various dimensions of that title (paras 112-115). 
        - One dimension is its **inalienability**. Lands held pursuant to aboriginal title cannot be transferred, sold or surrendered to anyone other than the Crown and, as a result, is inalienable to third parties. 
        - Another dimension of aboriginal title is its **source**. It had originally been thought that the source of aboriginal title in Canada was the *Royal Proclamation*, 1763 ... . However, it is now clear that although aboriginal title was recognized by the *Proclamation*, it arises from the prior occupation of Canada by aboriginal peoples. 
        - A further dimension of aboriginal title is the fact that it is held **communally**. Aboriginal title cannot be held by individual aboriginal persons; it is a **collective right** to land held by all members of an aboriginal nation.
    -[125] The content of aboriginal title contains an inherent limit that lands held pursuant to title cannot be used in a manner that is irreconcilable with the nature of the claimants’ attachment to those lands. ... it is a *sui generis* interest that is distinct from “normal” proprietary interests, most notably **fee simple**.
    [128] ... For example, if occupation is established with reference to the use of the land as a **hunting ground**, then the group that successfully claims aboriginal title to that land may not use it in such a fashion as to destroy its value for such a use (e.g., by **strip mining** it). 
    [131]  ... If aboriginal peoples wish to use their lands in a way that aboriginal title does not permit, then they must **surrender those lands and convert them into non-title lands** to do so. 
    [143] In order to make out a claim for aboriginal title, the aboriginal group asserting title must satisfy the following **criteria**: 
        - (i) the land must have been occupied **prior to** sovereignty, 
        - (ii) if present occupation is relied on as proof of occupation pre-sovereignty, there must be a **continuity** between present and pre-sovereignty occupation, and 
        - (iii) at sovereignty, that occupation must have been exclusive.
    - **Infringements of Aboriginal Title: The Test of Justification** 
    - [165] The general principles governing **justification** laid down in [***R v Sparrow***, [1990] 1 SCR 1075, 1990 CanLII 104], and embellished by [***R v Gladstone***, [1996] 2 SCR 723, 1996 CanLII 160], operate with respect to infringements of aboriginal title. ... In my opinion, the development of agriculture, forestry, mining, and hydroelectric power, the general economic development of the interior of British Columbia, protection of the environment or endangered species, the building of infrastructure and the settlement of foreign populations to support those aims, are the kinds of objectives that are consistent with this purpose and, in principle, can justify the infringement of aboriginal title. 
    - [166] The manner in which the **fiduciary duty** operates with respect to the **second stage** of the **justification test**, both with respect to the standard of scrutiny and the particular form that the fiduciary duty will take, will be a function of the nature of aboriginal title. Three aspects of aboriginal title are relevant here.
        - First, aboriginal title encompasses the right to **exclusive** use and occupation of land; 
        - second, aboriginal title encompasses **the right to choose** to what uses land can be put, subject to the ultimate limit that those uses cannot destroy the ability of the land to sustain future generations of aboriginal peoples; and 
        - third, that lands held pursuant to aboriginal title have an inescapable **economic component**.


In ***Tsilhqot’in Nation v. British Columbia***, [2014 SCC 44](https://canlii.ca/t/g7mt9){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada has subsequently “softened” the inherent limit. Chief **Justice McLachlin** framed the restrictions on Aboriginal title in the following terms:

> [74] Aboriginal title, however, comes with an important restriction, it is collective title held not only for the present generation but for all succeeding generations. This means it cannot be alienated except to the Crown or encumbered in ways that would prevent future generations of the group from using and enjoying it. Nor can the land be developed or misused in a way that would substantially deprive future generations of the benefit of the land.


In ***Tsilhqot’in Nation***, the Supreme Court of Canada, drawing on the principle of the Crown’s fiduciary obligations, has added another limit to what can constitute a justifiable infringement of Aboriginal title, stating that “incursions on Aboriginal title cannot be justified if they would **substantially deprive future generations of the benefit of the land**” (at para 86).

The task for the Court in title cases (***R. v. Marshall; R. v. Bernard***, [2005 SCC 43](https://canlii.ca/t/1l5zg){:target=" \_blank"}) was described as determining **whether** Indigenous practices “indicate possession similar to that associated with title at common law” (at para 54) and **whether** they correspond to “the core notions of common law title to land” (at para 61).

The most recent case dealing with the issue of Aboriginal title, ***Tsilhqot’in Nation***, dealt with the question of whether so-called **semi-nomadic** Indigenous peoples could prove that their occupation of land was sufficient to meet the ***Delgamuukw*** case.

!!! info "*Tsilhqot’in Nation v. British Columbia*, [2014 SCC 44](https://canlii.ca/t/g7mt9){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - **The Test for Aboriginal Title**
    - [25] As we have seen, the ***Delgamuukw*** test for Aboriginal title to land is based on **“occupation” prior to assertion of European sovereignty**. To ground Aboriginal title this occupation must possess three characteristics. It must be **sufficient**; it must be **continuous** (where present occupation is relied on); and it must be **exclusive**.
    - **Sufficiency of Occupation**
    - [34] The question of sufficient occupation must be approached from **both the common law perspective and the Aboriginal perspective** (***Delgamuukw***, at para. 147)
    - [37] Sufficiency of occupation is a context-specific inquiry. “[O]ccupation may be established in a variety of ways, ranging from the construction of dwellings through cultivation and enclosure of fields to regular use of definite tracts of land for hunting, fishing or otherwise exploiting its resources” (***Delgamuukw***, at para. 149).
    - [38] To sufficiently occupy the land for purposes of title, the Aboriginal group in question must show that it has historically acted in a way that would communicate to third parties that it held the land for its own purposes. 
    - [41] In summary, what is required is a culturally sensitive approach to sufficiency of occupation based on the **dual perspectives** of the **Aboriginal group** in question, its laws, practices, size, technological ability and the character of the land claimed, and the **common law notion** of possession as a basis for title.
    - **Continuity of Occupation** 
    - [46] The concept of continuity does not require Aboriginal groups to provide evidence of an unbroken chain of continuity between their current practices, customs and traditions, and those which existed prior to contact (***Van der Peet***, at para. 65). **The same applies to Aboriginal title.** **Continuity** simply means that ... the present occupation must be rooted in pre-sovereignty times. 
    - **Exclusivity of Occupation**
    - [47] The third requirement is exclusive occupation of the land at the time of sovereignty. The Aboriginal group must have had “***the intention and capacity to retain exclusive control***” over the lands (***Delgamuukw***, at para. 156).
    - [50] The **claimant group bears the onus** of establishing Aboriginal title. The task is to identify how pre-sovereignty rights and interests can properly find expression in modern common law terms.
    - **What Rights Does Aboriginal Title Confer?** 
    - [69] At the time of assertion of European sovereignty, the Crown acquired radical or underlying title to all the land in the province. This Crown title, however, was **burdened** by the pre-existing legal rights of Aboriginal people who occupied and used the land prior to European arrival. ... The Aboriginal interest in land that burdens the Crown’s underlying title is an independent legal interest, which gives rise to a fiduciary duty on the part of the Crown. 
    - [71] What remains, then, of the Crown’s radical or underlying title to lands held under Aboriginal title? The authorities suggest **two related elements**: a **fiduciary duty** owed by the Crown to Aboriginal people when dealing with Aboriginal lands, and **the right to encroach** on Aboriginal title if the government can justify this in the broader public interest under s. 35 of the *Constitution Act*, 1982. 
    - [72] **Aboriginal title is what it is**: the unique product of the historic relationship between the Crown and the Aboriginal group in question. 
    - [74] Aboriginal title, however, comes with an important restriction: it is **collective title** held not only for the **present generation** but for all **succeeding generations**. 
    - [76] The right to control the land conferred by Aboriginal title means that governments and others seeking to use the land must **obtain the consent** of the Aboriginal title holders. If the Aboriginal group does not consent to the use, the government’s only recourse is to establish that the proposed incursion on the land is **justified** under s. 35 of the *Constitution Act*, 1982.
    - **Justification of Infringement** 
    - [77] To justify overriding the Aboriginal title-holding group’s wishes on the basis of the broader public good, the government must show: 
        - (1) that it discharged its procedural duty to consult and accommodate, 
        - (2) that its actions were backed by a compelling and substantial objective; and 
        - (3) that the governmental action is con-sistent with the Crown’s fiduciary obligation to the group: [***R v Sparrow***, [1990] 1 SCR 1075, 1990 CanLII 104]. 
    - [80] Where Aboriginal title is unproven, the Crown owes a procedural duty imposed by the honour of the Crown to consult and, if appropriate, accommodate the unproven Aboriginal interest. By contrast, where title has been established, the Crown must not only comply with its procedural duties, but must also ensure that the proposed government action is substantively consistent with the requirements of s. 35 of the *Constitution Act*, 1982. 
    - [82] To constitute a compelling and substantial objective, the broader public goal asserted by the government must further the goal of reconciliation, having regard to both the Aboriginal interest and the broader public objective. 
    - [84] If a compelling and substantial public purpose is established, the government must go on to show that the proposed incursion on the Aboriginal right is consistent with the **Crown’s fiduciary duty** towards Aboriginal people. 
        - [86] First, the Crown’s fiduciary duty means that the government must act in a way that respects the fact that Aboriginal title is a group interest that inheres in present and future generations.
        - [86] First, the Crown’s fiduciary duty means that the government must act in a way that respects the fact that Aboriginal title is a group interest that inheres in present and future generations.
    - **Remedies and Transition**
    - [89] Prior to establishment of title by court declaration or agreement, ... If the Crown fails to discharge its duty to consult, various remedies are available including injunctive relief, damages, or an order that consultation or accommodation be carried out: ***Rio Tinto Alcan Inc. v. Carrier Sekani Tribal Council***, 2010 SCC 43, [2010] 2 S.C.R. 650, at para. 37. 
    - [90] After Aboriginal title to land has been established by court declaration or agreement, the Crown must seek the consent of the title-holding Aboriginal group to developments on the land. Absent consent, development of title land **cannot proceed unless** the Crown has discharged its duty to consult and can justify the intrusion on title under s. 35 of the *Constitution Act*, 1982. 

## Discussion 6.2 Oral Evidence in the Courtroom

### Samantha's Comment

There is definitely a need to adapt the current system to more fully recognize these **oral histories**. These histories:

- Provide insight into the experiences and perspectives of Indigenous people that may not be captured in written records
- Help to recognize and validate Indigenous knowledge and traditions
- Can be a useful tool for understanding the context of land disputes, treaty rights, and other legal matters involving Indigenous people
- Support the process of reconciliation by giving Indigenous people a platform to share their stories and experiences
- Can help to overcome language and cultural barriers that may be present in traditional court proceedings

These seem to be some of the barriers and biases that need to be overcome:

- Oral histories may not be considered as reliable as written records or other forms of evidence
- They can be difficult to verify or corroborate the accuracy of oral histories
- Oral histories may be subject to bias or selective memory

Overall, while the use of Aboriginal oral histories as evidence in court has its benefits, it also presents challenges and limitations that must be carefully considered by the legal system. It is important to find ways to strike a balance between respecting Indigenous traditions and ensuring a fair and just legal process.

## 6.3 Treaty Rights

!!! note "Readings"

    - Constitutional Law: Chapter 14 (pp. 617-632)

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">**Module Content**</p>

In December 2012, the grass-roots protest movement known as “Idle No More” began to grow in Canada.  At the heart of the Idle No More movement is, in part, the idea that relations between indigenous and non-indigneous Canadians should be based on mutual respect, on the model of treaties or mutual agreements between communities.

"**Idle No More**,” in Wikipedia, online: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Idle_No_More](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Idle_No_More){:target=" \_blank"}

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">Textbook Summary</p>

**TREATY RIGHTS**

Section 35(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982 protects two broad classes of rights: (1) Aboriginal rights, and (2) treaty rights. 

By and large, treaty-making in Canada can be divided into three eras: **(1)** pre-Confederation, **(2)** post-Confederation, and **(3)** modern treaties.

At issue in ***R. v. Sioui***, [1990 CanLII 103 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fsvg){:target=" \_blank"} was the constitutionality of actions of members of the Huron nation on the Lorette Indian reserve in Quebec. Justice Lamer ...stated that the Court must choose “from among the various possible interpretations of the common intention the one which best reconciles the Hurons’ interests and those of the conquerer” (at 1069).

In ***R. v. Badger***, [1996 CanLII 236 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1frbp){:target=" \_blank"}, Cory J for the Supreme Court identified
several canons of treaty interpretation that inform contemporary jurisprudence on the subject:

- First, it must be remembered that a treaty represents an exchange of solemn
promises between the Crown and the various Indian nations. It is an agreement whose nature is sacred. 
- Second, the honour of the Crown is always at stake in its dealing with Indian people. ... It is always assumed that the Crown intends to fulfil its promises. 
- Third, any ambiguities or doubtful expressions in the wording of the treaty or document must be resolved in favour of the Indians. A corollary to this principle is that any limitations which restrict the rights of Indians under treaties must be narrowly construed. 
- Fourth, the onus of proving that a treaty or aboriginal right has been extinguished lies upon the Crown. 

!!! info "*R. v. Marshall*, [1999 CanLII 665 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fqkq){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - [14] ... in ***R. v. Badger***, [1996 CanLII 236 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1frbp){:target=" \_blank"}, at para. 52:
        - [W]hen considering a treaty, a court must take into account the context in which the treaties were negotiated, concluded and committed to writing. As a result, it is well settled that the words in the treaty must not be interpreted in their strict technical sense **nor subjected to rigid modern rules of construction**.
    - The bottom line is the Court’s obligation is to “choose from among the various possible interpretations of the common intention [at the time the treaty was made] the one which best reconciles” the Mi’kmaq interests and those of the British Crown (***R. v. Sioui***, [1990 CanLII 103 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fsvg){:target=" \_blank"}, at p. 1069).
    - [40] In my view, the Nova Scotia judgments **erred** in concluding that the only enforceable treaty obligations were those set out in the **written** document of March 10, 1760, whether construed flexibly (as did the trial judge) or narrowly (as did the Nova Scotia Court of Appeal). 
    - [41] Having concluded that the written text is incomplete, it is necessary to ascertain the treaty terms not only **by reference to** the fragmentary **historical record** ... , but also in light of the stated **objectives** of the British and Mi’kmaq in 1760 and the **political and economic context** in which those objectives were reconciled. 
    - [43] The law has long recognized that parties make assumptions when they enter into agreements about certain things that give their arrangements efficacy. 
    - [47] The point is that the treaty rights-holder not only has the right or liberty “enjoyed by other British subjects” but may enjoy special treaty protection against interference with its exercise. So it is with the trading arrangement.
    - [48] Until enactment of the *Constitution Act*, 1982, the treaty rights of aboriginal peoples could be overridden by competent legislation. ... however, this particular type of “hedge” was converted by s. 35(1) into sterner stuff that could only be broken down when justified according to the test laid down in ***R. v. Sparrow***, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1075, at pp. 1112 et seq., as adapted to apply to treaties in ***Badger***, *supra*, per Cory J., at paras. 75 et seq. 
    - [64] ... Cory J. in ***Badger***, *supra*, at para. 79, found that the test for infringement under s. 35(1) of the *Constitution Act*, 1982 was the **same for both aboriginal and treaty rights** ... 

In 2014, the Supreme Court of Canada did not apply the liberal principles of treaty interpretation deployed in ***Marshall***. In ***Grassy Narrows First Nation v Ontario (Natural Resources)***, the Court did not once refer to these canons of construction. Instead, the Court chose to prioritize other constitutional norms, as evident in the following excerpt.


!!! info "*Grassy Narrows First Nation v. Ontario (Natural Resources)*, [2014 SCC 48](https://canlii.ca/t/g80bn){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - [3] ... The legal issue in this case is whether Ontario can “take up” lands in the Keewatin area under Treaty 3 so as to limit the harvesting rights under the treaty, or whether it needs federal authorization to do so. 
    - [4] ... Ontario alone has the ability to take up Treaty 3 land and regulate it ... A two-step process involving federal approval for provincial taking up was not contemplated by Treaty 3. 
    - [32] The view that only Canada can take up, or authorize the taking up of, lands under Treaty 3 rests on a **misconception** of the legal role of the Crown in the treaty context. It is true that Treaty 3 was negotiated with the **Crown in right of Canada**. But that does not mean that the **Crown in right of Ontario** is not bound by and empowered to act with respect to the treaty. 
    - [37] While s. 91(24) allows the federal government to enact legislation dealing with Indians and lands reserved for Indians that may have incidental effects on provincial land, the applicability of provincial legislation that affects treaty rights through the taking up of land is determined by ***Mikisew Cree First Nation v. Canada (Minister of Canadian Heritage)***, [2005 SCC 69](https://canlii.ca/t/1m1zn){:target=" \_blank"}, and by s. 35 of the *Constitution Act*, 1982.
    - [50] I conclude that as a result of ss. 109, 92(5) and 92A of the *Constitution Act*, 1867, Ontario and only Ontario has the power to take up lands under Treaty 3. ... **However**, this power is not unconditional. In exercising its jurisdiction over Treaty 3 lands, the Province of Ontario is bound by the duties attendant on the Crown. It must exercise its powers in conformity with the honour of the Crown, and is subject to the fiduciary duties that lie on the Crown in dealing with Aboriginal interests. 
    - [51] ... the Crown’s right to take up lands under Treaty 3 is subject to its duty to **consult** and, if appropriate, **accommodate** First Nations’ interests beforehand (***Mikisew***, at para. 56). This duty is grounded in the honour of the Crown and binds the Province of Ontario in the exercise of the Crown’s powers.
    - [53] ... If Ontario’s taking up of Keewatin lands amounts to an infringement of the treaty, the ***Sparrow*** analysis under s. 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982 will determine whether the infringement is justified.


John Borrows' critique on ***Grassy Narrows***, “*Canada’s Colonial Constitution*” 

> The Court found that the province was unrestrained by federal authority in taking up Treaty 3 lands for settlement because it held the beneficial interest in these lands under section 109 of the *Constitution Act*, 1867. 

> The Supreme Court of Canada has acted to enhance provincial development and control of First Nations lands. The shielding of First Nations from local governments has been abandoned.

The “taking up” of land under a treaty may involve the duty to consult: see ***Mikisew Cree First Nation v. Canada (Minister of Canadian Heritage)***, [2005 SCC 69](https://canlii.ca/t/1m1zn){:target=" \_blank"}, and ***Beckman v. Little Salmon/Carmacks First Nation***, [2010 SCC 53](https://canlii.ca/t/2df7v){:target=" \_blank"}. 

Modern treaties ... [T]hese modern land claims agreements are constitutionally protected by virtue of s 35(3) of the *Constitution Act*, 1982, which reads, “For greater certainty, in subsection (1) ‘treaty rights’ includes rights that now exist by way of land claims agreements or may be so acquired.” In ***Beckman v. Little Salmon/Carmacks First Nation***, [2010 SCC 53](https://canlii.ca/t/2df7v){:target=" \_blank"}, a majority held that,

> The historical treaties were typically expressed in lofty terms of high generality and were often ambiguous. The courts were obliged to resort to general principles (such as the honour of the Crown) to fill the gaps and achieve a fair outcome. 
> 
> Modern comprehensive land claim agreements, on the other hand, starting perhaps with the *James Bay and Northern Québec Agreement* (1975), while still to be interpreted and applied in a manner that upholds the honour of the Crown, were nevertheless intended to create some precision around property and governance rights and obligations.


## Discussion 6.3 Treaty rights and Idle No More

**Samantha's Comment**

The **Idle No More** movement emerged in Canada in 2012 as a grassroots mobilization of Indigenous peoples and their allies to resist the federal government's policies that undermine their rights and sovereignty. 

The movement initially focused on opposition to the omnibus Bill C-45, which weakened environmental protection laws and made changes to the *Indian Act* without consulting Indigenous communities. The movement used social media, round dances, flash mobs, and other forms of peaceful protests to raise awareness and demand meaningful consultation and accommodation of Indigenous peoples' concerns. The movement also highlighted the need to address issues such as missing and murdered Indigenous women, land rights, and treaty implementation. 

Although the movement has faced some criticism and internal divisions, it has contributed to raising public awareness about Indigenous rights and has inspired many Indigenous-led initiatives and alliances across Canada and beyond.

## 6.4 The Duty to Consult

!!! note "Reading"

    - Constitutional Law: Chapter 14 (pp. 632-635)

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">**Module Content**</p>

!!! info ""No Duty to Consult First Nations", CBC News Network political panel from Thursday, October 11, 2018"

    The Supreme Court of Canada (SCC) recently ruled that the federal government is **not required to consult First Nations before drafting legislation**. This decision has prompted significant debate among legal experts and commentators regarding its implications for Indigenous rights and the legislative process in Canada.

    **Pam Palmater** characterized the ruling as a **huge shock and a step back**, suggesting it effectively overturns three decades of jurisprudence that defined the duty to consult. Prior to the ruling, the federal government was engaged in consultations, operating under the understanding that it had a legal duty to consult on legislation pertaining to First Nation rights. **Palmater** argues that **the duty to consult applies to the Crown universally**, and making distinctions between the executive and the legislature undermines the constitutional protection provided by Section 35. She dismisses the argument that pre-legislative consultation would make passing laws too onerous or unworkable, noting the SCC has repeatedly held that difficulty or extra burden is not an excuse to avoid upholding a constitutional right. Furthermore, forcing First Nations to legally challenge legislation *after* it is passed means asking the "most impoverished people in this country" to finance costly legal battles against Canada on a case-by-case basis.

    **Conversely**, others on the panel, including **Tasha Carradine** and **John Ibbetson**, argued the decision was based on practical and procedural necessity. They emphasized the court’s clear distinction between **executive or regulatory bodies** (which do have a duty to consult, like the National Energy Board) and **legislative bodies**. **Ibbetson** stated that the rights of Indigenous Canadians were not advanced, but the court affirmed that the existing right to challenge legislation *after* it is passed, as a violation of Section 35, remains the legal "yardstick". **Carradine** noted that allowing the legislative process to be halted between readings due to claims of insufficient consultation would obstruct Parliament, especially since guidelines on the duty to consult are not fully set in stone and vary by case. Budget provisions, for example, often require secrecy that would be violated by pre-drafting consultation.

    The debate also focused on the concept of the **honor of the Crown**, a constitutional principle requiring the government to act in good faith and minimally impair First Nations rights. **Palmater** suggests the ruling "guts" this constitutional protection. **Justice Abella**, in a dissenting opinion, argued that the principles of the honor of the Crown and parliamentary supremacy must be made to work together.

    Ultimately, the sources suggest that the ruling reinforces the *status quo*, where Parliament's supremacy is preserved while maintaining the ability for affected groups to challenge laws post-enactment. The National Chief of the Assembly of First Nations noted that while consultation is not a duty during drafting, using the Aboriginal and treaty rights lens *is* advised to prevent expensive and time-consuming court fights later. **John Ibbetson** believes the court is intentionally keeping the waters "muddy," hoping that Indigenous groups and the government will find a **political solution** rather than a purely judicial one. Prime Minister **Trudeau** has indicated a desire to redefine the relationship and give Section 35 "more teeth".

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">Textbook Summary</p>

**THE DUTY TO CONSULT**

In ***Coastal GasLink Pipeline Ltd. v Huson***, [2019 BCSC 2264](https://canlii.ca/t/j49x4){:target=" \_blank"}, the judge found she could not give effect to Wet’suwet’en law:

> [127] As a general rule, Indigenous customary laws do not become an effectual part of Canadian common law or Canadian domestic law until there is some means or process by which the Indigenous customary law is **recognized as being part of Canadian domestic law, either through incorporation into treaties, court declarations** ...

How can Indigenous law be implemented when the executive, legislative, or judicial branches of government have not themselves recognized its force? 

In ***Delgamuukw v. British Columbia***, [1997 CanLII 302 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fqz8){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada wrote that the government had a duty to consult with Indigenous peoples when developments affected their rights. 

> [168] ... **There is always a duty of consultation**. Whether the aboriginal group has been consulted is relevant to determining whether the infringement of aboriginal title is justified ... . **The nature and scope of the duty of consultation will vary with the circumstances.** In occasional cases, when the breach is less serious or relatively minor, it will be no more than a duty to discuss important decisions that will be taken with respect to lands held pursuant to aboriginal title. Of course, even in these rare cases when the minimum acceptable standard is consultation, this consultation must be in good faith, and with the intention of substantially addressing the concerns of the aboriginal peoples whose lands are at issue. In most cases, it will be significantly deeper than mere consultation. Some cases may even require the full consent of an aboriginal nation, particularly when provinces enact hunting and fishing regulations in relation to aboriginal lands.

In an extraordinary series of cases, beginning with ***Haida Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests)***, [2004 SCC 73](https://canlii.ca/t/1j4tq){:target=" \_blank"}, immediately below, the Supreme Court of Canada has elaborated on and strengthened this “**duty to consult**,” grounding it in the principle that the honour of the Crown is at stake in all its dealings with Indigenous peoples. ... the duty extends to cases where claims of Aboriginal rights or title have been **asserted but not yet proven**.

## Discussion 6.4 Duty to Consult

**Samantha's Comment**

In Canada, the government has a legal duty to consult and accommodate Indigenous peoples when making decisions that may affect their constitutionally protected rights, such as land use, resource development, and environmental protection. This duty arises from section 35 of the *Constitution Act*, 1982, which recognizes and affirms Aboriginal and treaty rights. 

The duty to consult requires the government to engage in a meaningful and good faith dialogue with Indigenous communities to identify and address potential impacts of their decisions on Indigenous rights and interests. Failure to fulfill this duty may result in legal challenges and delays in project approvals.  What we are seeing in some of these articles is dispute over whether the consultation that took place was in fact meaningful and in good faith.

## 6.5 Métis rights

!!! note "Reading"

    - Constitutional Law: Chapter 14 (pp. 647-653)
    - headnote to the case ***Manitoba Metis Federation Inc. v. Canada (Attorney General)***, [2013 SCC 14](https://canlii.ca/t/fwfft){:target=" \_blank"}

**Headnote to *Manitoba Metis Federation***

The obligations enshrined in ss. 31 and 32 of the *Manitoba Act* did not impose a fiduciary duty on the government.  

In the Aboriginal context, a fiduciary duty may arise in two ways.  

- First, it may arise as a result of the Crown assuming discretionary control over specific Aboriginal interests.  Where the Crown administers lands or property in which Aboriginal peoples have an interest, such a duty may arise if there is 
    - (1) a specific or cognizable Aboriginal interest, and 
    - (2) a Crown undertaking of discretionary control over that interest.
    
    The interest must be **a communal Aboriginal interest in land** that is integral to the nature of the **Métis** distinctive community and their relationship to the land.  It must be predicated on historic use and occupation, and cannot be established by treaty or by legislation.

- Second, and more generally, a fiduciary duty may arise if there is 
    - (1) an undertaking by the alleged fiduciary to act in the best interests of the alleged beneficiary; 
    - (2) a defined person or class of persons vulnerable to a fiduciary’s control; and 
    - (3) a legal or substantial practical interest of the beneficiary that stands to be adversely affected by the alleged fiduciary’s exercise of discretion or control.

Although the Crown undertook discretionary control of the administration of the land grants under ss. 31 and 32 of the *Manitoba Act*, the **Métis** are Aboriginal, and they had an interest in the land, **the first test for fiduciary duty is not made out** because neither the words of s. 31 nor the evidence establish a pre‑existing communal Aboriginal interest held by the **Métis**.  Their interests in land arose from their personal history, not their shared distinct **Métis** identity.

Nor was a fiduciary duty established on the basis of an undertaking by the Crown.  While s. 31 shows an intention to benefit the **Métis** children, it does not demonstrate an undertaking to act in their best interests, in priority to other legitimate concerns.

However, the **Métis** are entitled to a declaration that the federal Crown failed to act with diligence in implementing the land grant provision set out in s. 31 of the *Manitoba Act*, in accordance with the honour of the Crown.

In the context of the implementation of a constitutional obligation to an Aboriginal people, the honour of the Crown requires that the Crown:  (1) take a broad **purposive approach** to the interpretation of the promise; and (2) **act diligently** to fulfill it.

The duty to **act diligently** is a narrow and circumscribed duty.  Not every mistake or negligent act in implementing a constitutional obligation to an Aboriginal people brings dishonour to the Crown, and there is no guarantee that the purposes of the promise will be achieved.  **However**, a persistent pattern of errors and indifference that substantially frustrates the purposes of a solemn promise may amount to a betrayal of the Crown’s duty to act honourably in fulfilling its promise.

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">Textbook Summary</p>

The Red River **Métis** formed a provisional government that was given authority to negotiate the terms of union with Ottawa and bring the area into Confederation. The negotiations were challenging, but an agreement was reached and its terms were embodied in the *Manitoba Act* of 1870 (UK), 32 & 33 Vict, c 3. 

We begin this section with ***R v Powley***, the Supreme Court of Canada’s 2003 decision in which it addressed for the first time the treatment of **Métis** rights under s 35 of the *Constitution Act*, 1982.

!!! info "*R. v. Powley*, [2003 SCC 43](https://canlii.ca/t/51pd){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - **The Van der Peet Test** 
    - [15] The core question in [***R v Van der Peet***, [1996] 2 SCR 507, 1996 CanLII 216] was: “**How should the aboriginal rights recognized and affirmed by s. 35(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982 be defined?**” (para. 15, per Lamer C.J.). Lamer C.J. wrote for the majority, at para. 31:
        - [W]hat s. 35(1) does is provide the constitutional framework through which the fact that aboriginals lived on the land in distinctive societies, with their own practices, traditions and cultures, is acknowledged and reconciled with the sovereignty of the Crown.
    - [16] [I]n ***Van der Peet*** ... , the majority recognized that the pre-contact test might prove inadequate to capture the range of **Métis** customs, practices or traditions that are entitled to protection, since **Métis** cultures by definition **post-date European contact**. 
    - [17] As indicated above, the inclusion of the **Métis** in s. 35 is not traceable to their pre-contact occupation of Canadian territory. The purpose of s. 35 as it relates to the **Métis** is therefore different from that which relates to the **Indians** or the **Inuit**. 
    - [18] ... We accept ***Van der Peet*** as the template for this discussion. However, we modify the pre-contact focus of the ***Van der Peet*** test when the claimants are **Métis** to account for the important differences between **Indian** and **Métis** claims. Section 35 requires that we recognize and protect those customs and traditions that were historically important features of **Métis** communities **prior to the time of effective European control, and that persist in the present day**. 
    - [19] The **first** step is to **characterize the right** being claimed: ***Van der Peet***, *supra*, at para. 76. Aboriginal hunting rights, including Métis rights, are contextual and site-specific. 
    - **Identification of the Historic Rights-Bearing Community**: 
        - [21] The trial judge found that a distinctive Métis community emerged in the Upper Great Lakes region in the mid-17th century, and peaked around 1850. 
    - **Identification of the Contemporary Rights-Bearing Community**: 
        - [24] Aboriginal rights are communal rights: They must be grounded in the existence of a historic and present community, and they may only be exercised by virtue of an individual’s ancestrally based membership in the present community.
    - **Verification of the Claimant’s Membership in the Relevant Contemporary Community**: 
        - [29] ... courts faced with **Métis** claims will have to ascertain Métis identity on a case-by-case basis. The inquiry must take into account both the value of community self-definition, and the need for the process of identification to be objectively verifiable.
        - [30] In particular, we would look to **three broad factors**:  self-identification, ancestral connection, and com-munity acceptance. 
        - [31] First, the claimant must **self-identify** as a member of a Métis community.
        - [32] Second, the claimant must present evidence of an **ancestral connection** to a historic Métis community. 
        - [33] Third, the claimant must demonstrate that he or she is **accepted by the modern community** whose continuity with the historic community provides the legal foundation for the right being claimed. 
    - **Identification of the Relevant Time Frame**:
        - [36] As indicated above, the pre-contact aspect of the ***Van der Peet*** test requires adjustment in order to take account of the post-contact ethnogenesis of the **Métis** and the purpose of s. 35. 
        - [37] The pre-contact test in ***Van der Peet*** is based on the constitutional affirmation that aboriginal communities are entitled to continue those practices, customs and traditions that are integral to their distinctive existence or relationship to the land. **By analogy**, the test for **Métis** practices should focus on identifying those practices, customs and traditions that are integral to the **Métis** community’s distinctive existence and relationship to the land. This unique history can most appropriately be accommodated by **a post-contact but pre-control test** that identifies the time when Europeans effectively established political and legal control in a particular area.
    - **Determination of Whether the Practice Is Integral to the Claimants’ Distinctive Culture**: facts finding
    - **Establishment of Continuity Between the Historic Practice and the Contemporary Right Asserted**:
        - [45] Section 35 reflects a new promise: a constitutional commitment to protecting practices that were historically important features of particular aboriginal communities. A certain margin of flexibility might be required to ensure that aboriginal practices can evolve and develop over time ...
    - **If There Is a Right, Determination of Whether There Is an Infringement**
        - [47] ... This lack of recognition, and the consequent application of the challenged provisions to the Powleys, infringe their aboriginal right to hunt for food ...
    - **Determination of Whether the Infringement Is Justified** 
        - [48] ... **Métis** would still be entitled to a priority allocation to satisfy their subsistence needs in accordance with the criteria set out in ***R. v. Sparrow***, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1075.

