---
layout: post
title: L505 Unit 2
date: 2025-09-10
draft: false
categories:
  - Law
tags:
  - "LAW 505: Canadian Public Law"
  - Unit 2
---

# Components of Canadian Government

## Parliament and the Legislative Process

The **Canadian Parliament** has three constituent parts:

- The **Monarch** of the United Kingdom.  According to Canada's constitution, many of the monarch's powers are to be exercised by the **governor general**, who is appointed on the advice of the prime minister.
- The **Senate**.  The upper chamber of Parliament is called the Senate.  Senators are appointed by the governor general, on the advice of the prime minister.
- The **House of Commons**.  The lower chamber of Parliament is the House of Commons.  **Members of the House of Commons are elected.**


An overview of fundamental features of all three components of Parliament.


<div class="videoWrapper">
    <!-- Copy & Pasted from YouTube -->
    <iframe width="1262" height="710" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/YSO27QPieTs" title="What is Parliament?" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>


### I. The Monarch

Canada’s system of government is a constitutional monarchy, meaning the **King is recognized as the formal Head of State**. While the Monarch’s role is largely symbolic, it represents the legal authority behind Canada’s institutions and the continuity of the state. Day-to-day responsibilities tied to the Crown are carried out by representatives like the **Governor General at the federal level** and **Lieutenant Governors in the provinces**.


!!! note "Read & Answer"

    - Read [Monarch and Governor General](https://learn.parl.ca/understanding-comprendre/en/people-in-parliament/monarch-and-governor-general/?utm_){:target=" \_blank"} and [Role and Responsibilities | The Governor General of Canada](https://www.gg.ca/en/governor-general/role-and-responsibilities){:target=" \_blank"} and [The Lieutenant Governors - Canada.ca](https://www.canada.ca/en/canadian-heritage/services/crown-canada/lieutenant-governors.html?utm_){:target=" \_blank"}.
    - Read ***Galati v. Canada (Governor General)***, [2015 FC 91](http://canlii.ca/t/gg59f){:target=" \_blank"} (paras. **1-12, 32-48**)
        - [1] The applicants seek to set aside the decision of His Excellency the Right Honourable David Johnston Governor General of Canada on June 19, 2014 to grant royal assent to Bill C-24, the Strengthening Canadian Citizenship Act, S.C. 2014, c. 22 (Strengthening Citizenship Act).
        - [5] The threshold statutory question is whether the Governor General, in granting royal assent, was a “federal board, commission or other tribunal” within the meaning of subsection 2(1) of the *Federal Courts Act*, R.S.C., 1985, c. F-7 (Federal Courts Act). Put otherwise, was the Governor General, in assenting to Bill C-24, **exercising a power or jurisdiction conferred** under “an Act of Parliament or by or under an order made pursuant to a prerogative of the Crown” as required by subsection 2(1).
        - [32] ... For the reasons that follow, I conclude that the Governor General’s grant of royal assent was a legislative act and, in consequence, the issue of whether the Governor General exceeded his constitutional authority in granting royal assent to the Strengthening Citizenship Act is not justiciable.
        - [33] Each of the branches of Canada’s government—the legislature; the executive and the judiciary—play a discreet role. ... No branch should overstep its bounds and each must show “proper deference for the legitimate sphere of activity of the other”. **Justiciability** is one of the legal devices or doctrines by which the courts give effect to **this principle**.
        - [34] The courts cannot intervene in the legislative process. ... courts “come into the picture when legislation is enacted and not before..."
        - [35] ... To review the Governor General’s act of granting royal assent, as the applicants request, would conflate the constitutionally discreet roles of the judiciary and the legislature, affecting a radical amendment of the Constitution Act, 1867 ...
        - [41] ... As such, **the Governor General serves as Canada’s formal head of state and the representative of the Queen in Canada, while the political head of state in Canada is the Prime Minister.**
        - [46] While section 55 confers discretion on the Governor General whether to assent, **that discretion is wholly constrained by the constitutional convention of responsible government.** In granting assent, the Governor General does not exercise an independent discretion. He acts on the advice of the Prime Minister.
        - [48] ... The Governor General may signify royal assent in writing, and in my view, everything up to the ink used to signify assent being dry is a legislative act and not justiciable. The application fails on this basis alone.
    - Guiding questions: What are the legislative powers exercised by the Governor General of Canada? Is the exercise of those powers justiciable (i.e. can it be challenged/reviewed in the courts)?

### II. The Senate

!!! note "Read"

    Read the following article about the role and composition of the Senate: [The Role of the Senate](https://learn.parl.ca/understanding-comprendre/en/how-parliament-works/the-role-of-the-senate/?utm_){:target=" \_blank"} then read this article about the history of the Senate: [The Road to Renewal | Senate GRO](https://senate-gro.ca/timeline/senate-history/){:target=" \_blank"}


Canada is unusual for a modern democracy in having an **unelected upper chamber** of the federal legislature.  The members of the Canadian Senate are **appointed by the governor general, on the advice of the prime minister**.  The constitution specifies a certain number of senators to be appointed from each province and territory of Canada.  Therefore, the senate plays a role in providing regional representation in Parliament.  

In 1980, the Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee's Report on Certain Aspects of the Canadian Constitution listed four roles of the Senate, all of which were complimentary to the functions of the House of Commons. They were: 
- a **revising** legislative role; 
- an **investigative** role; 
- a **regional** representative role and 
- a protector of **linguistic** and other **minorities** role.  

The Senate has also been the source of political controversy in Canadian politics almost since its establishment.  In the early 20th century, one such controversy surrounded the question of the eligibility of women to sit in the senate. 


Wishing to avoid this complex process of constitutional reform, the government of Canada referred a number of questions to the Supreme Court of Canada to determine whether it had the authority to **make certain reforms to the Senate without amending the Constitution**. The SCC responded in a case that has important implications for understanding the role of the Senate in Canadian law and democracy.

!!! note "Read & Answer"

    - Read *Reference re Senate Reform*, [2014 SCC 32](https://canlii.ca/t/g6mfs){:target=" \_blank"}.  Focusing on paragraphs. **1-20**, and **49-112**
    - Guiding questions:
        - The Court finds that implementing “consultative elections” for Senators would “modify the Senate’s role within our constitutional structure as a complementary legislative body of sober second thought.”  Why?
        - The Court also finds that imposing fixed terms for Senators would fundamentally change the nature of the Senate.  Why?
        - What are the historical justifications for the net worth and real property qualifications for Senators?  How well do these justifications stand up in contemporary Canada?  What alternative justifications are available?
        - At several points, the Court writes that the arguments of the Attorney General of Canada “privilege form over substance.”  What does this mean?  Do you agree?

### III. The House of Commons

!!! note "Read & Answer"

    - Read the following overview of the House of Commons: [The Role of the House of Commons](https://learn.parl.ca/understanding-comprendre/en/how-parliament-works/the-role-of-the-house-of-commons/){:target=" \_blank"}.  Then read about the functions of the house at [Members of the House of Commons: their role(BP-56E)](https://publications.gc.ca/Collection-R/LoPBdP/BP/bp56-e.htm?utm_){:target=" \_blank"}, then this [Guide](https://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2012/parl/X9-26-2011-eng.pdf){:target=" \_blank"} to the House of Commons.
    - Guiding questions:
        - What are the requirements of “effective representation” that are guaranteed by section 3 of the Charter of Rights? Do they include absolute parity of voting power? 
        - How is the number of seats in the House of Commons determined, and what principles guide their distribution among the provinces?
        - What are the main responsibilities of the House of Commons in Canada’s system of responsible government?
        - How does the House of Commons hold the executive branch accountable on a regular basis?
        - Why is the House of Commons considered more democratically legitimate than the Senate?

The House of Commons is responsible for the following:

- **Forming a government:** After a federal election, the political party with the most seats usually forms the government. The leader of that party becomes the Prime Minister, who chooses Cabinet ministers to lead different government departments and policy areas. Together, the Prime Minister and the Cabinet make decisions about government policy and potential new laws to introduce.
- **Passing bills:** The main role of the House of Commons is to introduce, debate and pass bills. This process involves many steps, both in the chamber and in committee.
- **Government accountability:** Members of Parliament (MPs) who belong to political parties other than the governing party form the **opposition**. Their role is to provide alternative perspectives and policies, debate ideas, and question the government about its actions and decisions.
- **Budgets and taxes:** The House of Commons decides how taxpayer money is redistributed across Canada. Budgets, estimates (the spending requirements for ministries) and funding issues are debated and resolved in the House.
- **Representing Canadians:** Each MP represents one of Canada’s 343 constituencies (also called ridings). They ensure that different perspectives – particularly those of the people living in their constituencies – are considered when making decisions.



The Role of MPs in the House of Commons.

- **The Speaker:** The Speaker presides over debates in the chamber, maintains order, and interprets the rules and traditions of the House of Commons in an impartial way. The Speaker is an MP who is elected to the role by other MPs.
- **Prime Minister:** As the Head of Government, the Prime Minister advances the government’s ideas in the chamber. They answer questions during Question Period, promote bills and debate the opposition.
- **Cabinet ministers:** These are MPs from the governing party who are chosen by the Prime Minister to oversee government departments (also called ministries) such as Finance, National Defence, Global Affairs, Indigenous Services, and Agriculture and Agri-Food. In the chamber, they introduce bills related to their ministries and answer questions about their areas of responsibility.
- **Opposition members:** MPs from political parties other than the governing party form the opposition. Their role is to ask the government questions and to provide alternative perspectives on issues.
- **“Backbenchers”:** The majority of MPs are known as “backbenchers.” (This term comes from the British Parliament, where MPs sit on benches rather than at individual desks.) They participate in debates, Question Period and committees, and they represent their constituents’ views in the chamber.



