---
layout: post
title: L588 Module 1
date: 2026-01-11
draft: false
categories:
  - Law
tags:
  - LAW_V 588 99C 2025W2 Ethics and Professionalism
  - Module 1
---

# Introduction to Legal Ethics

<!-- #### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">**Module Content**</p> -->

## 1.0: Overview

!!! note "Readings"

    - *Woolley*: Chapter 1: *Introduction to Legal Ethics*, Pages 1-12, 17-36
    - Code: Introduction; [2.1, 2.2; 1.1](https://www.lawsociety.bc.ca/for-lawyers/act-rules-and-code/code-of-professional-conduct/chapter-1-%E2%80%93-interpretation-and-definitions/){:target=" \_blank"}
    - Cases:
        - ***Szarfer v Chodos***, [1986] O.J. No. 256
        - ***R v Neil***, 2002 SCC 70
        - ***Canada v Federation of Law Societies***, 2015 SCC 7

As you do the readings for Module 1, keep in mind the following key points and questions:

- **Sources of ethical conduct** form the basis for professional regulation of lawyers
- Sources include **legislation**, **codes of conduct**, **case law/disciplinary decisions**
- Which **principles or norms** form the basis for ethical conduct and professionalism? 

## 1.1: What are Ethics & Professionalism in a Legal Context?

!!! info "Introduction to the *BC Code*"

    (1) One of the hallmarks of civilized society is the rule of law. Its importance is reflected in every legal activity in which citizens engage. As participants in a justice system that advances the rule of law, lawyers hold a unique and important role in society. **Self-regulatory powers** have been granted to the legal profession in Canada on the understanding that the **profession will exercise those powers in the public interest**. Part of that responsibility is ensuring the appropriate regulation of the professional conduct of lawyers. Members of the legal profession who draft, argue, interpret and challenge the law of the land can attest to Canada's robust legal system. They also acknowledge the public’s reliance on the integrity of the people who work within the legal system and the authority exercised by the governing bodies of the profession. While lawyers are consulted for their knowledge and abilities, more than mere technical proficiency is expected of them. **A special ethical responsibility comes with membership in the legal profession**. This *Code of Professional Conduct for British Columbia* attempts to define and illustrate that responsibility in terms of a lawyer’s professional relationships with clients, the justice system and other members of the profession.

    (2) The *Legal Profession Act* provides that it is the object and duty of the Law Society of British Columbia to **uphold and protect the public interest** in the administration of justice. A central feature of that duty is to ensure that lawyers can identify and maintain the highest standards of ethical conduct. This ***Code*** attempts to assist lawyers to achieve that goal. While the ***Code*** should be considered a reliable and instructive guide for lawyers, the obligations it identifies are only the minimum standards of professional conduct expected of members of the profession. Lawyers are encouraged to aspire to the highest standards of competence, integrity and honour in the practice of their profession, whether or not such standards are formally addressed in the ***Code***.

    (3) The ***Code*** is published under the authority of the Benchers of the Law Society of British Columbia for the guidance of BC lawyers. It is significantly related to the *Federation of Law Societies’ Model Code of Professional Conduct*, though there are points of variance from the ***Model Code*** that the Benchers have considered to be appropriate for guiding practice in British Columbia. Where there is a corresponding provision in the ***Model Code***, the numbering of the BC ***Code*** is similar to that of the ***Model Code***. The BC ***Code*** is not a formal part of the Law Society Rules but, rather, an expression of the views of the Benchers about standards that British Columbia lawyers must meet in fulfilling their professional obligations. 

    (4) The Code is divided into three components: **rules**, **commentary** and **appendices**. Each of these components contain some statements that are **mandatory**, some that are **advisory** and others with **both mandatory and advisory** elements. Some issues are dealt with in more than one place in the ***Code***, and the ***Code*** itself is not exhaustive of lawyers’ professional conduct obligations. In determining lawyers’ professional obligations, the ***Code*** must be consulted in its entirety and lawyers should be guided in their conduct equally by the language in the rules, commentary and appendices. Mandatory statements have equal force wherever they appear in the ***Code***. 

    (5) A **breach** of a provision of the ***Code*** by a lawyer **may or may not be the basis of disciplinary action** against that lawyer. A decision by the Law Society to take such action will include a consideration of the language of the provision itself and the nature and seriousness of the conduct in question. 

    (6) The correct or best answer to ethical questions that arise in the practice or lives of lawyers may often be difficult to discern, whether or not the ***Code*** addresses the question directly. Lawyers should always be aware that discussion of such questions with Benchers, **Law Society practice advisors**, the Law Society’s Ethics Committee or other experienced and trusted colleagues is the approach most likely to identify a reasonable course of action consistent with lawyers’ ethical obligations. This ***Code*** is intended to be a valuable asset for lawyers in the analysis, discussion and resolution of such issues.

#### *BC Code*: Chapter 2 – Standards of the Legal Profession

**2.1  Canons of Legal Ethics**

These Canons of Legal Ethics in Code rules 2.1-1 to 2.1-5 are a general guide and not a denial of the existence of other duties equally imperative and of other rights, though not specifically mentioned. A version of these Canons has formed part of the Code of Professional Conduct of the Law Society of British Columbia since 1921. They are included here both for their historical value and for their statement of general principles that underlie the remainder of the rules in this Code.

A lawyer is a minister of justice, an officer of the courts, a client’s advocate and a member of an ancient, honourable and learned profession.

In these several capacities, it is a lawyer’s duty to promote the interests of the state, serve the cause of justice, maintain the authority and dignity of the courts, be faithful to clients, be candid and courteous in relations with other lawyers and demonstrate personal integrity.

**2.1-1  To the state**

(a) A lawyer owes a duty to the state, to maintain its integrity and its law. A lawyer should not aid, counsel or assist any person to act in any way contrary to the law.

(b) **When engaged as a Crown prosecutor, a lawyer’s primary duty is not to seek a conviction but to see that justice is done**; to that end the lawyer should make timely disclosure to the defence of all facts and known witnesses whether tending to show guilt or innocence, or that would affect the punishment of the accused.

(c) A lawyer should accept without hesitation, and if need be without fee or reward, the cause of any person assigned to the lawyer by the court, and exert every effort on behalf of that person.

**2.1-2  To courts and tribunals**

(a) A lawyer’s conduct should at all times be characterized by **candour and fairness**. The lawyer should maintain toward a court or tribunal a courteous and respectful attitude and insist on similar conduct on the part of clients, at the same time discharging professional duties to clients resolutely and with self-respecting independence.

(b) Judges, not being free to defend themselves, are entitled to receive the support of the legal profession against unjust criticism and complaint. Whenever there is proper ground for serious complaint against a judicial officer, it is proper for a lawyer to submit the grievance to the appropriate authorities.

(c) A lawyer should not attempt to deceive a court or tribunal by offering false evidence or by misstating facts or law and **should not, either in argument to the judge or in address to the jury, assert a personal belief in an accused’s guilt or innocence**, in the justice or merits of the client’s cause or in the evidence tendered before the court.

(d) A lawyer should **never seek privately to influence a court or tribunal**, directly or indirectly, in the lawyer’s or a client’s favour, nor should the lawyer attempt to curry favour with juries by fawning, flattery or pretended solicitude for their personal comfort.

**2.1-3  To the client**

(a) A lawyer should obtain sufficient knowledge of the relevant facts and give adequate consideration to the applicable law before advising a client, and give an **open and undisguised opinion** of the merits and probable results of the client’s cause. The lawyer should **be wary of bold and confident assurances** to the client, especially where the lawyer’s employment may depend on such assurances. The lawyer should bear in mind that seldom are all the law and facts on the client’s side, and that *audi alteram partem* (hear the other side) is a safe rule to follow.

(b) A lawyer should disclose to the client all the circumstances of the lawyer’s relations to the parties and interest in or connection with the controversy, if any, that might influence whether the client selects or continues to retain the lawyer. A lawyer must not act where there is a **conflict of interest** between the lawyer and a client or between clients.

(c) Whenever the dispute will admit of fair settlement the client should be advised to avoid or to end the litigation.

(d) A lawyer should treat adverse witnesses, litigants and counsel with **fairness and courtesy**, refraining from all offensive personalities. The lawyer must not allow a client’s personal feelings and prejudices to detract from the lawyer’s professional duties. At the same time, the lawyer should represent the client’s interests resolutely and without fear of judicial disfavour or public unpopularity.

(e) A lawyer should **endeavour by all fair and honourable means** to obtain for a client the benefit of any and every remedy and defence that is authorized by law. The lawyer must, however, steadfastly bear in mind that this great trust is to be performed within and not without the bounds of the law. The office of the lawyer does not permit, much less demand, for any client, violation of law or any manner of fraud or chicanery. No client has a right to demand that the lawyer be illiberal or do anything repugnant to the lawyer’s own sense of honour and propriety.

(f) It is a lawyer’s right to undertake the defence of a person accused of crime, regardless of the lawyer’s own personal opinion as to the guilt of the accused. Having undertaken such defence, the lawyer is bound to present, by all fair and honourable means and in a manner consistent with the client’s instructions, every defence that the law of the land permits, to the end that no person will be convicted except by due process of law.

(g) A lawyer should not, except as by law expressly sanctioned, acquire by purchase or otherwise any interest in the subject matter of the litigation being conducted by the lawyer. A lawyer should scrupulously guard, and not divulge or use for personal benefit, a client’s secrets or confidences. **Having once acted for a client in a matter, a lawyer must not act against the client in the same or any related matter.**

(h) A lawyer must record, and should report promptly to a client the receipt of any moneys or other trust property. The lawyer must **use the client’s moneys and trust property only as authorized by the client**, and not commingle it with that of the lawyer.

(i) A lawyer is entitled to reasonable compensation for services rendered, but should **avoid charges that are unreasonably high or low**. The client’s ability to pay cannot justify a charge in excess of the value of the service, though it may require a reduction or waiver of the fee.

(j) A lawyer should try to avoid controversies with clients regarding compensation so far as is compatible with self-respect and with the right to receive reasonable recompense for services. A lawyer should always bear in mind that the profession is a branch of the administration of justice and not a mere money-making business.

(k) A lawyer who appears as an advocate **should not submit the lawyer’s own affidavit to or testify before a court or tribunal** except as to purely formal or uncontroverted matters, such as the attestation or custody of a document, unless it is necessary in the interests of justice. If the lawyer is a necessary witness with respect to other matters, the conduct of the case should be entrusted to another lawyer.

**2.1-4  To other lawyers**

(a) A lawyer’s conduct toward other lawyers should be characterized by **courtesy and good faith**. Any ill feeling that may exist between clients or lawyers, particularly during litigation, should never be allowed to influence lawyers in their conduct and demeanour toward each other or the parties. Personal remarks or references between lawyers should be scrupulously avoided, as should quarrels between lawyers that cause delay and promote unseemly wrangling.

(b) A lawyer should neither give nor request an undertaking that cannot be fulfilled and should fulfil every undertaking given. A lawyer should never communicate upon or attempt to negotiate or compromise a matter directly with any party who the lawyer knows is represented therein by another lawyer, except **through or with the consent of that other lawyer**.

(c) A lawyer should avoid all sharp practice and should take no paltry advantage when an opponent has made a slip or overlooked some technical matter. A lawyer should accede to reasonable requests that do not prejudice the rights of the client or the interests of justice.

**2.1-5  To oneself**

(a) A lawyer should assist in maintaining the honour and integrity of the legal profession, should **expose** before the proper tribunals without fear or favour, **unprofessional or dishonest conduct by any other lawyer **and should accept without hesitation a retainer against any lawyer who is alleged to have wronged the client.

(b) It is the duty of every lawyer to guard the Bar against the admission to the profession of any candidate whose moral character or education renders that person unfit for admission.

(c) A lawyer should make legal services available to the public in an efficient and convenient manner that will command respect and confidence. A lawyer’s best advertisement is the establishment of a well-merited reputation for **competence and trustworthiness**.

(d) No client is entitled to receive, nor should any lawyer render any service or advice involving **disloyalty to the state or disrespect for judicial office**, or the **corruption** of any persons exercising a public or private trust, or **deception or betrayal of the public**.

(e) A lawyer should recognize that the oaths taken upon admission to the Bar are solemn undertakings to be strictly observed.

(f) All lawyers should bear in mind that they can maintain the high traditions of the profession by steadfastly adhering to the time-honoured virtues of **probity, integrity, honesty and dignity**.

**2.2  Integrity**

2.2-1  A lawyer has a duty to carry on the practice of law and discharge all responsibilities to clients, tribunals, the public and other members of the profession **honourably and with integrity**.

!!! info "Commentary"

    [1]  Integrity is the fundamental quality of any person who seeks to practise as a member of the legal profession. If clients have any doubt about their lawyers’ trustworthiness, the essential element in the true lawyer-client relationship will be missing. If integrity is lacking, the lawyer’s usefulness to the client and reputation within the profession will be destroyed, regardless of how competent the lawyer may be.

    [2]  Public confidence in the administration of justice and in the legal profession may be eroded by a lawyer’s irresponsible conduct. Accordingly, a lawyer’s conduct should reflect favourably on the legal profession, inspire the confidence, respect and trust of clients and of the community, and avoid even the appearance of impropriety.

    [3]  Dishonourable or questionable conduct on the part of a lawyer in either private life or professional practice will reflect adversely upon the integrity of the profession and the administration of justice. **Whether within or outside the professional sphere, if the conduct is such that knowledge of it would be likely to impair a client’s trust in the lawyer, the Society may be justified in taking disciplinary action.**

    [4]  Generally, however, the Society will not be concerned with the purely private or extra-professional activities of a lawyer that do not bring into question the lawyer’s professional integrity.

2.2-2  A lawyer has a duty to **uphold the standards and reputation of the legal profession** and to assist in the advancement of its goals, organizations and institutions.

!!! info "Commentary"

    [1] Collectively, lawyers are encouraged to enhance the profession through activities such as:

    - (a) sharing knowledge and experience with colleagues and students informally in day-to-day practice as well as through contribution to professional journals and publications, support of law school projects and participation in panel discussions, legal education seminars, bar admission courses and university lectures;

    - (b) participating in legal aid and community legal services programs or providing legal services on a *pro bono* basis;

    - (c) filling elected and volunteer positions with the Society;

    - (d) acting as directors, officers and members of local, provincial, national and international bar associations and their various committees and sections; and

    - (e) acting as directors, officers and members of non-profit or charitable organizations.

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">Textbook Summary: Introduction to Legal Ethics - Pages 1-12, 17-36</p>

**CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION TO LEGAL ETHICS**

!!! info "*Groia v. Law Society of Upper Canada*, [2018 SCC 27](https://canlii.ca/t/hsb9d){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - At issue is whether Mr. Groia’s courtroom conduct in the case of ***R. v. Felderhof***, 2007 ONCJ 345, warranted a finding of professional misconduct by the Law Society of Upper Canada.
    - The Appeal Panel’s finding of professional misconduct against Mr. Groia was **unreasonable**. 
  
        - The Appeal Panel used Mr. Groia’s sincerely held but mistaken legal beliefs to conclude that his allegations of prosecutorial misconduct lacked a reasonable basis. But, as I have explained, Mr. Groia’s legal errors - in conjunction with the OSC prosecutor’s conduct - formed the reasonable basis upon which his allegations rested. In these circumstances, it was not open to the Appeal Panel to conclude that Mr. Groia’s allegations lacked a reasonable basis. 
        - And because the Appeal Panel accepted that the allegations were made in good faith, it was not reasonably open for it to find Mr. Groia guilty of professional misconduct based on what he said. 
        - The Appeal Panel also failed to account for the evolving abuse of process law, the trial judge’s reaction to Mr. Groia’s behaviour, and Mr. Groia’s response - all factors which suggest Mr. Groia’s behaviour was not worthy of professional discipline on account of incivility. 
    
        The finding of professional misconduct against him was therefore unreasonable.

**Scenario One**

Traditionally, Canadian lawyers were prohibited from advertising and, in particular, were subject to much stricter restrictions on fee advertising than exist today. 

In the 1970s,  ... Law Society of British Columbia objected to Jabour’s advertising practices and disciplined him for unprofessional conduct. For more about Jabour’s case see: ***Law Society of British Columbia v Jabour*** [1980] B.C.J. No. 833, [1982] 2 S.C.R. 307 (S.C.C.).

**Scenario Two**

The Federation of Law Societies’ Model Code of Conduct **does not prohibit** a lawyer from having a sexual relationship with a client. It identifies such relationships as **potentially creating a conflict of interest**, noting that they may conflict with the lawyer’s ability to provide “objective, disinterested, professional advice” and might “permit exploitation of the client”. The Model Code prohibits lawyers from sexually harassing any person. 

The Model Code and case law also restrict the ability of a criminal defence lawyer to **withdraw from representation**, although withdrawal is permitted if an ethical issue has arisen in the representation.

**WHAT ARE LAWYERS’ ETHICS AND PROFESSIONAL REGULATION?**

Lawyers’ ethics addresses the **constraints** on lawyer conduct: the rules, principles and legal obligations with which lawyers are required to comply in conducting their legal practice.

At the level of **moral aspiration**, of course, there is more controversy, and less agreement, as to what lawyers’ ethics requires than there is at the level of legal constraint.

Lawyers’ ethics also considers the implications for **the life of a lawyer** of fulfilling the **lawyer’s role**. Specifically, whether helping a client to achieve their legal goals, without necessarily approving of those goals, corrodes the lawyer’s ethical life.

Like lawyer’s ethics, professional regulation is concerned with the ethics of legal practice. Its concern exists, however, **at the level of regulation and governance**.

**SOURCES**

In determining what constitutes ethical conduct, a lawyer can look to a number of sources for guidance. These include:

- **Case law and legislation;**
    - Indeed, case law and legislation may be the most significant doctrinal source of guidance for lawyers on what is required to act ethically.
- **Rules of professional conduct;**
    - Every provincial law society has rules of professional conduct. These rules are generally enacted by the law society pursuant to its legislative authority to regulate the legal profession.
    - Through the Federation of Law Societies of Canada, an umbrella organization to which all the provincial law societies belong, the law societies have created a high degree of uniformity in the rules of conduct across the provinces. 
    - In 2009, the Federation published a *Model Code of Professional Conduct*. All Canadian law societies outside of Québec have adopted a version of the Federation’s ***Model Code***.
    - Codes of conduct are therefore an essential but **non-exhaustive source** of guidance for a lawyer in deciding what to do in circumstances of ethical uncertainty.
- **Law society disciplinary decisions;** and
    - Disciplinary decisions provide insight into what provisions of the codes of conduct mean. They also indicate how law societies generally define **professional misconduct** (misconduct by the lawyer when practis- ing law) and **conduct unbecoming** (misconduct by the lawyer outside of their legal practice).
    - Disciplinary decisions set out the **standard of proof** for establishing that a lawyer has committed professional misconduct and the **sorts of sanctions that may be imposed**.
- **The principles or “norms” of lawyering.**
    - What principles or norms best define the lawyer’s role is **a matter of dispute**, with differing emphasis being placed on the important societal role that lawyers fulfill, on the requirements of ordinary morality, on the foundational morality of the legal system or on the lawyer’s own ethical integrity.

**WHAT DOES BEING AN ETHICAL LAWYER REQUIRE?**

**[a] Loyal Advocacy**

Loyalty is the core moral requirement or value traditionally associated with legal practice. It has three defining features: that the lawyer be **neutral** towards the client’s goals, that the lawyer **not be morally accountable** for the client’s goals, and that the lawyer **act as a partisan** to accomplish the client’s goals.

The lawyer’s obligation is to assist their client to pursue that
client’s legal ends, and to do so in a manner consistent with what the legal system itself requires.

The following excerpt (TIM DARE, “*Mere-Zeal, Hyper-Zeal and the Ethical Obligations of Lawyers*”, (2004) 7 Legal Ethics 24) defends the loyal advocacy conception of the lawyer’s role. Like most more recent defences of the loyal advocacy conception, it relies on the idea of **law as a form of social settlement**, arguing that the function of the lawyer is to help law achieve that purpose. It also identifies **limits on loyal advocacy**, suggesting that a lawyer ought to provide zealous representation of a client, but that zeal should be “mere-zeal” not “hyper-zeal”.

Compare and contrast the concept of the lawyer as zealous advocate set out by **Dare** with the approach of the Supreme Court of Canada in the following case.

!!! info "*R. v. Neil*, [2002 SCC 70](https://canlii.ca/t/50d1){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - [The appellant brought an application for a stay of proceedings in his criminal trial on the basis that there had been an abuse of process. The abuse arose from a conflict of interest of the law firm that initially represented him and that ultimately represented a co-accused.]
    - the duty of loyalty ... endures because it is essential to the **integrity of the administration of justice** and it is of high public importance that **public confidence** in that integrity be maintained.
    - The duty of loyalty is intertwined with the **fiduciary** nature of the lawyer-client relationship. One of the roots of the word fiduciary is *fides*, or loyalty, and loyalty is often cited as one of the defining characteristics of a fiduciary...
    - Fiduciary duties are often called into existence to protect **relationships** of importance to the public including, as here, **solicitor and client**. Disloyalty is destructive of that relationship.
    - The aspects of the duty of loyalty relevant to this appeal..., but engage more particularly three other dimensions:
        - **the duty to avoid conflicting interests** ... including the lawyer’s personal interest
        - **a duty of commitment to the client’s cause** (sometimes referred to as “zealous representation”) from the time counsel is retained, not just at trial, i.e. ensuring that a divided loyalty does not cause the lawyer to “soft peddle” his or her defence of a client out of concern for another client, and
        - **a duty of candour** with the client on matters relevant to the retainer ... If a conflict emerges, the client should be among the first to hear about it.

The Supreme Court considered the concept of loyal advocacy again in a 2015 decision, in which a majority of the Court held that money-laundering legislation violated both s. 7 and s. 8 of the *Charter of Rights and Freedoms* because of its potential to infringe solicitor-client privilege (s. 8) and because it impaired the lawyer’s liberty while violating “the principle of fundamental justice in relation to the lawyer’s duty of commitment to the client’s cause”. 

!!! info "*Canada (Attorney General) v. Federation of Law Societies of Canada*, [2015 SCC 7](https://canlii.ca/t/gg977){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - The duty of lawyers to **avoid conflicting interests** is at the heart of both the general legal framework defining the fiduciary duties of lawyers to their clients and of the ethical principles governing lawyers’ professional conduct.  This duty aims to avoid two types of risks of harm to clients: **the risk of misuse of confidential information** and **the risk of impairment of the lawyer’s representation of the client**.
    - The centrality to the administration of justice of preventing misuse of the client’s confidential information, reflected in solicitor-client privilege, led the Court to conclude that the **privilege required constitutional protection** in the context of law office searches and seizures.
    - the lawyer’s **duty of commitment to the client’s cause**, also requires some measure of **constitutional protection** against government intrusion... We should, in my view, recognize as a principle of fundamental justice that the state cannot impose duties on lawyers that undermine their duty of commitment to their clients’ causes.

In ***Strother v. 3464920 Canada Inc.***, [2007 SCC 24](https://canlii.ca/t/1rn36){:target=" \_blank"},  Justice Binnie, writing for the majority, held that fiduciary duties “may include obligations that **go beyond what the parties expressly bargained for**”. The duty of loyalty to a client can arise under contract, but more obviously arises under the fiduciary obligation.

!!! info "*Szarfer v. Chodos*, [1986 CanLII 2508 (ON SC)](https://canlii.ca/t/g1j2w){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - The fiduciary relationship between a lawyer and his client forbids a lawyer from using any confidential information obtained by him for the benefit of himself or a third person or to the disadvantage of his client.
    - Once the fiduciary relationship is established, as it is in this case, **the onus is on the trustee** to prove that he acted reasonably and made no personal use whatsoever of the confidential information.
    - The defendant has not discharged the onus of proving that he acted reasonably in the circumstances. That in itself is sufficient to hold him liable for damages.

**[b] The Lawyer as Moral Agent in Pursuit of Justice**

The emphasis on loyalty as the central norm of ethical practice arguably suffers from two weaknesses. 

- First, while there is much authority in support of the significance of loyalty to the lawyer-client relationship, there is also significant authority emphasizing the importance of other values (justice).
- Second, the emphasis on loyal advocacy, has been criticized for creating **moral malaise and unethical conduct** within the legal profession. 

---

## 1.2: Sources of Ethical Conduct

**Statutory Sources:**  

In British Columbia, the statutory basis for the Law Society’s regulation of lawyers stems from the *Legal Profession Act*.  The ***Act*** contains important provisions about the powers given to the Law Society and to Benchers who govern and administer the ***Act***.  The Benchers generally exercise authority over the creation of new *Law Society Rules* and Professional Conduct rules.  It contains less in the way of practical information to resolving specific ethical or professional dilemmas. 

The *Law Society Rules* cover the Organization, Membership & Authority to Practice, and Protection of the Public through the Complaints and Disciplinary hearings process.  The *Law Society Rules* are more important to know as they are relevant to professional conduct but they are also more oriented towards procedure rather than substance.

**Case Law Sources: ** 

Case law can be useful because it can provide real life examples of conduct that may be ethically questionable and how they have been dealt with those in those situations. The cases that we examine in the course are grouped roughly into two categories:

- **“Regular”** court of law cases, such as from B.C. Supreme Court or Supreme Court of Canada. Case law from other common law jurisdictions may be examined as well.
- **“Disciplinary”** or other decisions from administrative tribunals such as the Law Society of B.C. Tribunal.

Regular court cases, or cases from Superior courts, also illustrate how other parts of the common law are interpreted, like the law of negligence relating to basic standards of a lawyer’s competence or obligations under contract law that might stem from a lawyer’s retainer agreement.  Solicitor-Client privilege is heavily influenced by the law of evidence and criminal law.  Criminal law, not surprisingly, is one area that often intersects with questions of lawyer’s ethics.  You should be familiar with the leading cases dealing with lawyer’s ethics as they may often be useful in deciding on a course of action. 

Disciplinary decisions from Law Society of BC Tribunal are useful for specific purposes.  They can aid you in interpreting the meaning of certain provisions of the ***Code*** and also how certain actions by lawyers have been disciplined.  These decisions are very useful for specific definitions such as what constitutes professional misconduct and conduct becoming of a lawyer and also may also define what types of evidence is required to prove misconduct.  Disciplinary decisions typically only address very narrow issues involving **lawyer misconduct** and clear **violations of law**.  You generally will not find deep discussion of ethical issues and lawyer’s conduct in disciplinary decisions like you do in some Supreme Court of Canada decisions or other court decisions. 

**Codes of Conduct or Professional Conduct Rules:  **

Codes of Conduct or Professional Conduct Rules are generally useful for our purposes because they specifically cover several important topics with ethical and professional considerations: client selection, competence, conflict of interest, confidentiality, fees, advising clients.  

In B.C. the professional conduct rules are known as *Code of Professional Conduct for British Columbia* (generally referred to in this course as the “***BC Code***” or simply “the ***Code***”).  The code of Rules used to be called the Professional Conduct Handbook but the Code replaced it in 2013. The  ***Code*** is based on the *Federation of Law Societies Model Code of Professional Conduct*, although it has some differences from the ***Model Code*** to consider the B.C. legal context.  These differences will be highlighted as we examine various sections of the Code. 

It is important to note that the ***Code*** is **not** a completely **exhaustive** source.  Many rules are sometimes enforced in different ways defending on the context.  They are often worded to allow for a lawyer to exercise at least a degree of discretion in decision-making.  So it is important for you to use them as a guide but also ultimately to use your own judgment.

**Moral Norms:**

However in many ethical situations you usually you need to go beyond law, rules and code.  This could occur when you are faced with a discretionary decision (e.g. Code provisions that specify “may” instead of “must not”).  This is when the difficult decisions may have to be made.  It is when you may also notice a gap between legal obligations and “ordinary” moral obligations.  This is the area of basic principles or “norms” that apply to all the decisions that lawyers have to make.  Unsurprisingly, there is no agreement among lawyers about the basic principles or norms that should guide lawyers’ professional behaviour in these discretionary situations.

!!! info "What is a moral norm?"

    - "Moral norms are the rules of morality that people ought to follow.” - *Oxford Handbooks Online*
    - The rules of morality that most people generally follow are guided by specific ethical decision-making.  The text references the “four components” of ethical decision-making based on 4 psychological processes outlined by the American Psychologist James Rest:
        - **Moral sensitivity** relates to the individual ability to recognize that a situation contains a moral issue and the awareness that their decision has the potential to either harm or benefit other parties.
        - **Moral judgment** involves the reasoned analysis of possible solutions to the moral issue and determination of which ones are ethically sound and have moral justification.
        - **Moral character** is an individual behaviour in the situation, often involving courage and determination to persist in carrying out the moral decision.
        - **Moral motivation** is guided by an individual’s intention to choose a value over another decision reflecting another value (e.g. self-interest, money, power).
 
## 1.3: Professional Requirements of Ethical Lawyering

In this topic we will review some case law that applies the principles of ethical lawyering and “loyal advocacy.”  Put simply, the basic requirements of a loyal advocate include **neutrality**, **no moral accountability** and **explicit partisanship** in working for their client.  It involves being explicitly partisan on behalf of your client with no moral accountability for your client’s aims or goals.  Ethical and professional conflicts can arise where your client’s goals may be legal but arguably immoral. 

However, the purpose of loyal advocacy is not to win your case at all costs.  The Canadian model of advocacy focuses on the **social and political functions of law – and the lawyer – in Canadian society**.  Looking at **Tim Dare**’s article in the text reading it raises some interesting questions, with the answers always being that a lawyer should provide zealous representation of a client, **“mere zeal” as opposed to “hyper zeal.”**

The basis for his analysis of law's function – and role of lawyers in that legal system – is that legal institutions and actors are designed to mediate between a diverse range of views that exists in a democracy like Canada.  The greater the legitimacy of those legal institutions the more that Canadian citizens and governments will respect them and abide by the rule of law.  This is derived from work of John Rawls’ “**plurality of conceptions**” in society.  Reasonable pluralism refers to those conceptions shared by a majority of society, excluding extreme views like fascism/Nazism, violent anarchism, etc.  

Liberal democracy adopts the “neutrality” of law and legal system even when there are serious disagreements over contentious political or social issues.  One example is the issue of firearms regulation in Canada.  No substantive resolution of that debate will please everyone however neutrality in reaching the legal decision helps in legitimizing law and role of judges and lawyers. 

!!! info "*Szarfer v. Chodos*, [1986 CanLII 2508 (ON SC)](https://canlii.ca/t/g1j2w){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - This is a very basic distillation of the role of law in a democratic pluralist society like Canada.  So where specifically do lawyers fit into this?  Paristanship is an interesting principle because it ties into this concept of “zeal” – zeal can be defined as “great energy and extraordinary enthusiasm”.  Lawyers have to be partisan in advocating for their client, they should probably be zealous.  
    - Contrast this with “hyper zeal” – it’s not a word in itself but hyper is defined variously as “excessive or above or beyond” – in this context, hyper zeal referring to excessive zeal – not necessarily going beyond the law definitely pushing the limits and more important, using tactics or procedures that while legal could be seen as unethical. 
    - These types of actions are often seen when they are power imbalances between legal parties. ... Hyper-zealous decisions and actions go hand in hand with procedure and may refer to a hyper-zealous lawyer using an arguably ethically dubious legal procedure in order to win their case or to achieve the best possible result for their client.
    - In ***Szarfer***, the issue involved a lawyer’s fiduciary duty to their client.  Specifically, when does a lawyer using confidential information – for their own benefit – violate principle of client loyalty and trust?  In particular, consider the court’s statement in ***Szarfer*** about the solicitor-client fiduciary relationship:
        - The fiduciary relationship between a lawyer and his client forbids a lawyer from using any confidential information obtained by him for the benefit of himself or a third person or to the disadvantage of his client.” (para 29)

!!! info "*R. v. Neil*, [2002 SCC 70](https://canlii.ca/t/50d1){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - Loyalty and trust are essential elements of a solicitor-client relationship and this is an area where conflicts of interest can often arise.  The Supreme Court of Canada case of ***R v Neil*** is a very important decision that deals with the **Duty of Loyalty** and **conflicts of interest** issues relating to Canadian lawyers.  As expressed in ***R v Neil***, the Duty of Loyalty is actually composed of several other duties, including avoiding **conflicts of interest**, **a commitment to the client’s cause** and **a duty of candour or honesty** to your client. 
    - For this Module, you should note what the court says about duty of loyalty.  The relevant issue was whether a law firm created a conflict of interest by one of its lawyers assisting in establishing the charges against a past client of the firm.  
    - The court used this case to explain the concept of a lawyer’s “duty of loyalty.”  At paragraph 19, the aspects of the duty of loyalty mentioned above were clearly outlined by the court.  One of the central questions to consider here involves the limits of a lawyer’s “duty of loyalty” and the court dealt with that question in para 33 of the decision, where the court held that **the firm breached their duty of loyalty to their client by accepting a retainer that required the firm to present evidence of the illegal conduct of their client in an unrelated matter**, at time when they knew he was facing criminal charges relating to his paralegal practice. 
        - “Fiduciary duties are often called into existence to protect relationships of importance to the public including, as here, solicitor client.  Disloyalty is destructive of that relationship...” (para 16).

!!! info "*Canada (Attorney General) v. Federation of Law Societies of Canada*, [2015 SCC 7](https://canlii.ca/t/gg977){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - One question that arises in this context is the extent of the duty loyalty.  Specifically, how far does one element of the duty loyalty - the duty of commitment to the client’s cause – relate to the principle of fundamental justice?  This was one of the central questions in this case. 
    - this case involved Canadian lawyers becoming subject to requirements in federal money laundering and terrorist financing legislation.   As of November 2001, the legislation required lawyers to keep records of certain financial transactions made on behalf of clients, minimally including the amount of the transaction and the name of the clients. The legislation authorized a federal agency to conduct searches of lawyers’ offices to ensure that lawyers were complying with the statutory record keeping requirements.   The Federation of Law Societies objected to this search power as it did not incorporate the protections for privilege set out in previous Supreme Court of Canada decisions.  **The central issue was solicitor client privilege but also involved a lawyer’s duty of commitment to the goals of their client.** The Federation of Law Societies argued the Act effectively turned lawyers into agents of the state.  
    - As you think about this decision, keep in mind what the Supreme Court of Canada says about a “Principle of Fundamental Justice” and how it applied in this case.
        - Principles of fundamental justice have three characteristics. They must be **legal principles**, there must be "**significant societal consensus**" that they are "fundamental to the way in which the legal system ought fairly to operate" and they must be **sufficiently precise** so as ‘to yield a manageable standard against which to measure deprivations of life, liberty or security of the person’. – ***Federation of Law Societies of Canada***, para 87.
    - Note that many academics and lawyers argued that in this decision, the Supreme Court took a much stronger position on the absolute inviolability of solicitor-client privilege than some positions taken by some European Courts. For example, the European Court of Human Rights and the European Court of Justice have in recent years upheld the application of money laundering schemes to lawyers. (see for example, ***Michaud v France*** (Application no. 12323/11))

## Module 1 Discussion Activity: Sources of Law - Cannons of Legal Ethics

A litigant must be assured of the undivided loyalty of the lawyer representing them. The duty of loyalty to the client remains an integral component to the integrity of the administration of justice.  

There are limits to this loyalty as set out in s.2.1-3 of the Code. Provide a new to you (not from the course materials) **case summary** in the last five years that addresses one of the **limits to the duty of loyalty** to the client and your thoughts on the decision as to whether the duty of loyalty was properly complied with.

**Answer:**

***Gregory v. The Law Society of British Columbia***, 2024 BCCA 350

In this case, the appellant, an experienced litigator, was found guilty of professional misconduct for failing to make reasonable inquiries into clients suspected of money laundering. The appellant argued that his duty of loyalty as litigation counsel allowed him to assist his clients without investigating their legitimacy until the matter reached trial or settlement.

The Court of Appeal rejected this argument, clarifying that a lawyer’s commitment to a client’s cause has clear limits. This duty should not be confused with being a “dupe or accomplice”; it does not authorize a lawyer to facilitate illegal acts, advance unfounded claims, or present false evidence. Lawyers have a proactive responsibility to ensure they are not burdening the justice system with claims rooted in criminal activity.

The decision indicates that a lawyer must satisfy themselves that a client is not seeking to break the law before taking steps that could advance an unlawful intent. By filing affidavits and setting hearing dates despite obvious “red flags,” the appellant’s conduct amounted to a marked departure from professional standards. Ultimately, the duty of loyalty is superseded by the obligation to maintain the integrity of the law.

To illustrate this balance, the Court likened a lawyer to a gatekeeper of the legal system. While lawyers must zealously help their clients navigate the process, they cannot hold the door open for those they have reason to suspect are carrying “criminal contraband.”

I agree with the Court’s decision because it properly recognizes that a lawyer’s duty of loyalty does not exist in isolation from the broader legal system. While lawyers are expected to be committed to advancing their clients’ interests, that commitment cannot extend to turning a blind eye to clear signs of illegality. 

Treating loyalty as an absolute duty risks undermining the integrity of the justice system by allowing lawyers to become passive conduits for unlawful conduct. The Court’s reasoning appropriately draws a line between zealous representation and impermissible facilitation of wrongdoing, emphasizing that lawyers must exercise independent judgment and make reasonable inquiries when serious red flags arise. 

In this sense, the decision affirms that loyalty to a client is ultimately constrained by, and subordinate to, a lawyer’s fundamental obligation to uphold the rule of law and the proper administration of justice.

## 1.4: Summary

In this introductory module we have examined the foundation of ethics and conduct in the legal profession.  

## Module Quiz

!!! danger "Module 1 Quiz"

    1. Which of the following provides the legal authority to practice law in British Columbia?
        - [ ] The *Legal Profession Act*
        - [ ] The *BC Code of Professional Conduct*
        - [ ] Policy Statements issued by the Law Society
        - [ ] All of the above

    2. In ***Canada v Federation of Law Societies of Canada*** the duty of lawyers to avoid conflicting interests is at the heart of both the general legal framework defining the fiduciary duties of lawyers to their clients and of the ethical principles governing lawyer's professional conduct.
        - [ ] True
        - [ ] False

    3. From ***R v Neil***, a duty of commitment to the client's cause (zealous representation) includes:
        - [ ] the duty is engaged at trial
        - [ ] ensuring that a divided loyalty does not cause the lawyer to "soft peddle" his or her defence of a client out of concern for another client
        - [ ] a and b above

    4. It is a lawyer's right to undertake the defence of a person accused of a crime, regardless of the lawyer's own personal opinion as to the guilt of the accused.  Having undertaken such defence, the lawyer is bound to present the defence in the following fashion:
        - [ ] by all fair and honourable means
        - [ ] in a manner consistent with the client's instructions
        - [ ] every defence that the law of the land permits
        - [ ] a and b
        - [ ] a, b and c

    5. ***Szarfer v Chodos*** sets out the highest and clearest duty of a fiduciary which is to:
        - [ ] act exclusively to advance the beneficiary's interest
        - [ ] acting to the client's detriment
        - [ ] permitting his or her own interest to come into conflict with the interest of the beneficiary of the relationship

    6. There are five cannons of legal ethics according to the ***Code***. These cannons are the only duties and rights a lawyer is bound by.
        - [ ] True
        - [ ] False
 
    7. Pursuant to Rule 2.1-3 of the ***Code***, lawyers in B.C. are never required to advise their client to avoid or to end the litigation.
        - [ ] True
        - [ ] False


