---
layout: post
title: L509 Unit 4
date: 2025-10-01
draft: false
categories:
  - Law
tags:
  - Administrative Law
  - LAW_V 509 99A 2025W1
  - Unit 4
---

# Procedural Fairness

This Module covers another central administrative law concept, that of procedural fairness. The rules for procedural fairness vary according to the enabling statutes and subject-matter for the various tribunals. However, there are many commonalities among basic principles. For example, the procedural outlines for decision-makers used by Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada frames basic requirements of **procedural fairness** for applicants:

- To be provided with a **fair and unbiased assessment** of their application
- To be **informed** of the decision-makers concerns, and
- To have a meaningful opportunity to provide a **response** to concerns about their application.

## 4.1 Sources & Development of Procedural Fairness

!!! note "Readings"

    - Textbook, pp. 178-195
    - ***Nicholson v. Haldimand-Norfolk Regional Police Commissioners***, [1978 CanLII 24 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1mkvl){:target=" \_blank"}

Five core principles that underlie the law of fair procedure in the administrative context:

### A . THE INHERENT VALUE OF FAIRNESS

Fair procedure is valuable because it expresses a **commitment to integrity** in exercises of public power and a **respect for the dignity** of the parties affected by state action. Fairness is, in this way, **an end worthy of pursuit** in and of itself.

**Extending the Reach of Procedural Obligations**

Historically, two branches of natural justice, namely **_audi alteram partem_** (“hear the other side”) and **_nemo judex in sua causa_** (“no person can be the judge in their own cause”).

In the later decades of the 20th century, the courts moved away from the distinction between judicial, quasi-judicial, and administrative decisions when determining which public actors must act fairly.

the duty of fairness is assessed on a **spectrum**. At the l**ow end** of the spectrum, a decision-maker is bound by a minimum level of procedural duties, such as simply providing notice that a decision will be made to affected parties. At the **high end**, a decision-maker must follow a more onerous set of procedures that may, in some cases, replicate the procedures followed in a civil or criminal trial.

**The Legal Consequences of Unfairness**

As a general rule, administrative decisions that are made unfairly **cannot stand**, even if the merits of the decisions are sound.

### B . THE RULE OF LAW AND ACCESS TO JUSTICE

the **rule of law** is a shared project in which public power is distributed across a sprawling, horizontal network of actors. Many **institutions**, legislatures, the executive, the courts, and the expanse of actors operating within the administrative state, participate in implementing, advancing, upholding and, at times, resisting and undermining the values that the rule of law seeks to protect. **Private** actors also play a role in upholding the rule of law by having high **expectations** of public actors and holding public decision-makers to **account** when those expectations are not met.

**Implications this conception of the democratic rule of law have for procedural justice:**

- First, upholding the democratic rule of law is a responsibility shared by a range of public institutions.
- Second, procedural design and interpretations of fairness can have a meaningful impact, either positive or negative, on access to justice.
  - administrative law should strive to ensure that the legal meaning of fairness is attentive to the **inextricable connection** between procedural integrity and the full participation of affected parties in public decision-making.
- Third, the democratic rule of law demands that those who wield public power are held accountable when they act unlawfully.
- A fourth and final response is that the democratic rule of law is upheld not merely by formal mechanisms of accountability and oversight, but also by a culture of decision-making that reflects fundamental **values and the norms** of good public administration.

      - A core element of the culture of the rule of law is justification; the democratic vision regards the “justificatory exercise of reason-giving ... as an essential component of the rule of law.
      - In **_Baker_**, the Court held that an administrative decision-maker is under a duty to provide “some form of reasons” when an administrative decision has “important significance.
      - In **_Vavilov_**, the Court described the significance of this commitment in terms of legitimacy at 81, "[W]here reasons are required, they are the primary mechanism by which administrative decision makers show that their decisions are reasonable." and at para 98, "[w]here a decision maker’s rationale for an essential element of the decision is not addressed in the reasons and cannot be inferred from the record, the decision will generally fail to meet the requisite standard of justification, transparency and intelligibility."

### C . ENFRANCHISEMENT AND FLEXIBILITY

Specific procedures that comprise a process that is fair, on the whole, will always depend on the **context**.

Every fair process must include steps that fall into two broad categories: **first**, steps concerned with “the quality of **participation** afforded to persons affected by [the] decision” and **second**, steps concerned with “the kinds of **reasons** which may be offered to justify the decision itself.

The law treats both **participatory rights** and **protections from bias** as vital to the integrity and fairness of public decision-making.

In **_Baker_**, **L’Heureux-Dubé J** articulated the **legal standard for assessing whether modes of participation are fair**. “Administrative decisions,” she held, must be “made using a fair and open procedure, appropriate to the decision being made and its statutory, institutional, and social context, with an opportunity for those affected by the decision to put forward their views and evidence fully and have them considered by the decision-maker.”

The **standard for disqualifying bias** is equally well-established. It was set out in **_Committee for Justice and Liberty et al. v. National Energy Board et al._**, [1976 CanLII 2 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1mk9k){:target=" \_blank"}, a case dealing with allegations of bias against the National Energy Board. **de Grandpré J** held that to determine whether a decision-maker is tainted by a reasonable apprehension of bias, we should ask what an “informed person, viewing the matter realistically and practically, and having thought the matter through, [would] conclude.”

<p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">There is no set or checklist of procedures that will automatically meet the standards
set in ***Baker*** or ***National Energy Board*** in all cases. ... the standards must be **sufficiently expansive** to capture all administrative decision-making contexts. The specific procedures that must be followed in order to satisfy the demands of fairness in each case will **always depend on the circumstances**.</p>

However, as the stringency and complexity of procedural obligations expand, access to justice may diminish.

In **_Canada (Attorney General) v. Mavi_**, [2011 SCC 30 (CanLII)](https://canlii.ca/t/flsj3){:target=" \_blank"}, Binnie J wrote,

> **a balance must be struck**. Administering a “fair” process inevitably slows matters down and costs the taxpayer money. On the other hand, the public also suffers a cost if government is perceived to act unfairly, or administrative action is based on “erroneous, incomplete or ill-considered findings of fact, conclusions of law, or exercises of discretion.

**THE PRACTICES OF PROCEDURAL FAIRNESS**

In order to determine the specific procedures that any administrative decision-maker must follow, we must always look to three types of sources: **statutes and subordinate instruments**, the **Constitution**, and the **common law**.

**Enabling Statutes and Internal Instruments**

Barring any constitutional concerns, the obligations set out in
the enabling statute will be binding on the decision-maker. It is rare for a decision-maker’s enabling statute to provide a complete procedural code. The procedures set out in the enabling
statute will usually be a minimum set that is then **supplemented** with additional obligations from additional regulation(s), the common law, internally made rules (see e.g. a discussion of “soft law” below), and, in some cases, constitutional law.

The legislature will **delegate** the authority to establish additional procedural obligations to an executive actor.

Research shows that soft law **instruments** developed by a decision-maker are powerful sources of authority for front-line decision-makers and have been treated as _de facto_ binding on the ground. However, guidelines, including procedural guidelines, are **not legally binding** on a decision-maker.

Guidelines established by an administrative decision-maker can give rise to **legitimate expectations** that a particular process will be followed. We see this at work in **_Agraira v. Canada (Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness)_**, [2013 SCC 36](https://canlii.ca/t/fz8c4){:target=" \_blank"}.

**General Procedural Codes**

Some administrative decision-makers are also subject to procedural obligations set out in **general procedural statutes**. General procedural codes have been enacted in four provinces: **Quebec, Ontario, Alberta, and British Columbia**. These statutes set out common procedures that govern the decision-making bodies that fall within the scope of the statutes.

### Module Content

It’s important to note for now that decision-making is now seen as existing on a **spectrum**. The type of administrative decision and the procedural obligation it triggers influences where it will fall on this spectrum and the types of procedural fairness requirements accorded.

Our case reading for this topic, **_Nicholson v. Haldimand Norfolk (Regional) Police Commissioners_**, illustrates the movement towards developing a “duty of fairness” that applied to all administrative decision-makers. As noted above this duty consists of a **spectrum** of procedural obligations **ranging from providing mere notice to following an exhaustive set of procedures akin to a criminal trial**.

The theory in **_Nicholson_**, that entitlements to basic fairness in procedure no longer depended completely on the nature of the tribunal, was subsequently developed in practice through various decisions.

## 4.2 Threshold Test & Trigger

!!! note "Readings"

    - Textbook, pp 23-25 (A); 201-203
    - Cardinal v. Director of Kent Institution, [1985 CanLII 23 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1ftwk){:target=" \_blank"}
