---
layout: post
title: L509 Unit 6
date: 2025-11-08
draft: false
categories:
  - Law
tags:
  - Administrative Law
  - LAW_V 509 99A 2025W1
  - Unit 6
---

# Bias and Independence

## 6.0 Overview

In Latin, the phrase ***nemo judex in sua causa debet esse***  [“no one should be a judge in her or his own cause"] refers directly to cases where a decision-maker has a direct stake in the outcome of the proceedings.    However, concerns with **bias** going beyond financial interests to include attitudes and relationships to both the parties and the relevant issues at stake.  

Issues of **bias** can arise from an attitude or relationship that creates misgivings as to whether the decision maker will approach and determine the matters in issue in an objective way without concerns related to any self-interest. 

**Independence** arguments, by contrast, have appeared in Canada as a separate ground for challenging administrative decisions.  Section 11(h) of the *Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms* specifically refers to a requirement of an “independent and impartial tribunal” in the criminal context, but this has provided some guidance in administrative processes as well.  

**Independence**, or **lack of independence**, has become a basis for challenging administrative decisions and procedures where decision-makers’ independence is in issue.

## 6.1 Sources and Definitions

!!! note "Readings"

    - Textbook, pp 27, 248-267
    - ***Ocean Port Hotel Ltd. v. British Columbia (General Manager, Liquor Control and Licensing Branch)***, [2001 SCC 52](https://canlii.ca/t/520r){:target=" \_blank"}

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">**Module Content**</p>

**Bias:** the action of supporting or opposing a particular person or thing in an **unfair** way, because of allowing **personal opinions to influence your judgment**.

**Judicial Independence:** Judicial independence has many definitions, but ultimately it means that judicial officers of the Court have the **freedom to decide each case on its own merits**, without interference or influence of any kind from any source, including another branch of government.

In Canada, the sources of an impartial and independent decision-maker originate from the **common law**. There is also the argument that an independent and impartial tribunal is guaranteed through unwritten **constitutional principles** and the **rule of law**.  This was the situation in the ***Ocean Port Hotel*** case.

In ***Ocean Port***, the court was concerned with members of the province's Liquor Appeal Board who, under the enabling statute, served at the pleasure of the lieutenant governor in council. The B.C. Court of Appeal considered the severity of the economic consequences of a licence suspension that could be imposed on licensees for infringement of the licensing laws.  The Court of Appeal held that the degree of independence possessed by members of the tribunal should approach that expected of a court at common law. Seen in those terms, the tenuous nature of the members' appointments was insufficient to satisfy **the security of tenure aspects of the independence** requirements and the Court of Appeal ruled in favour of Ocean Port. 

The Supreme Court of Canada **reversed** that decision, holding that members of the B.C. Liquor Appeal Board are sufficiently independent to render decisions on violations of the Act and impose the penalties it provides.

!!! info "*Ocean Port Hotel Ltd. v. British Columbia (General Manager, Liquor Control and Licensing Branch)*, [2001 SCC 52](https://canlii.ca/t/520r){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - [17] The issue is whether members of the **Liquor Appeal Board** are sufficiently independent to render decisions on violations of the Act and impose the penalties it provides. 
    - [20] ...absent constitutional constraints, the degree of independence required of a particular government decision maker or tribunal is determined by its **enabling statute**. It is the **legislature** or **Parliament** that determines the degree of independence required of tribunal members. 
    - [21] Confronted with silent or ambiguous legislation, courts generally **infer** that Parliament or the legislature intended the tribunal's process to comport with principles of natural justice.
    - [22] However, like all principles of natural justice, the degree of independence required of tribunal members may be **ousted** by express statutory language or necessary implication. It is not open to a court to apply a common law rule in the face of clear statutory direction. Courts engaged in judicial review of administrative decisions must **defer** to the legislator's intention in assessing the degree of independence required of the tribunal in question.
    - [24] Administrative tribunals, by contrast, lack this constitutional distinction from the executive. While tribunals may sometimes attract Ch*a*rter requirements of independence, **as a general rule they do not**. 



#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">Textbook Summary</p>

Key characteristics of a fair proceeding are that the decision-maker (and the process itself) not grant undue preferential or adverse treatment nor be driven by preconceived notions.

Consequently, regardless of what the reality may be in any given administrative decision-making process, the mere **perception of partiality** toward a particular outcome, or *bias*, provided that the perception is reasonable, is **enough** to have a decision overturned. 

At common law, the **principles of natural justice** are encapsulated in two central ideas. 

- The first is that a decision-maker should neither judge their own cause nor have any interest in the outcome of a case they are deciding. This idea is generally known as the rule against bias and is often summarized in the Latin maxim ***nemo judex in sua causa debet esse*** (“no one is fit to be the judge in their own cause”). 
- The second idea requires the decision-maker to hear and listen to both sides of the case before making a decision. This requirement has been summarized by the maxim ***audi alteram partem*** (“hear the other side”).

A determination by an independent and impartial tribunal is guaranteed in some cases through the *Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms*. **What** is not always clear, however, is what specific situations **trigger** guarantees of independence and impartiality from administrative bodies or **how** the administrative bodies need to be construed or operated in order to **show** that they are independent and impartial.

By design, administrative decision-making bodies in Canada have been created in a way that leaves them connected to government.

Given the close relationship in Canada between the executive branch of governments and the administrative agencies they appoint, one can easily see how members of the general public may be wary of inappropriate interference in administrative decision-making.

The jurisprudence on tribunal independence in Canada has developed in three waves:

- The **first** wave of jurisprudence used the **independence of the judiciary** as a foundation on which to mould the concept of administrative tribunal independence. 
- The **second** wave, marked by the decision in ***Ocean Port***, affirmed the **hybrid nature** of tribunals and maintained that there is no general constitutional guarantee of independence where tribunals are concerned. 
- The **third** wave served as a retrenchment: litigants once again pushed to have judicial declarations that administrative tribunal independence is **guaranteed by the Constitution**. 

Referenced briefly in the Supreme Court’s decision in ***The Queen v. Beauregard***, [1986 CanLII 24 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fts8){:target=" \_blank"}, the **concept of adjudicative independence** embodies the ability of a decision-maker to decide, **free of inappropriate interference** by other decision-makers.

Unlike security of tenure, financial security, and administrative control, adjudicative independence is **not structural in nature**.

The purpose of judicial independence is to help boost **public confidence** in the justice system: it is for the protection of the public, not the protection of the judges. The independence of administrative tribunals seeks to achieve the **same goal** while also allowing tribunal members to use their expertise and analytical capacities to reach the best decisions. 

Over the years, the **test** for adequate tribunal independence has developed to be whether a reasonable, well-informed person having thought the matter through would conclude that an administrative decision-maker is sufficiently free of factors that could interfere with his or her ability to make impartial judgments. This test, is generally referred to as the “**reasonable apprehension of bias**” test.

In many cases, the objective guarantees of independence for the judiciary **do not meet** anything near a complete match for tribunals.

The issue of whether **“at pleasure” appointments** fail to provide adequate guarantees of independence from arbitrary interference by the executive branch of government was addressed in ***Ocean Port***. It was not resolved, however, as the 2009 case of ***Keen v. Canada (Attorney General)***, [2009 FC 353](https://canlii.ca/t/2344s){:target=" \_blank"} demonstrates. For more than one reason, ***Ocean Port*** forms a turning point in the jurisprudence on the independence of administrative tribunals.

**Ocean Port**

The Supreme Court disagreed the unwritten constitutional principle guaranteeing judicial independence should be interpreted to extend to administrative tribunals as well.

Tribunals are created precisely for the purpose of implementing the policies of the executive branch of government. The Court held that because constitutional guarantees of independence serve primarily to protect the judiciary from interference by the executive, they cannot work to protect tribunals from the branch of government of which they are a part.

It is up to **Parliament or the legislature to determine** the structure, responsibilities, and degree of independence required of any particular tribunal. 

Furthermore, the Supreme Court reminded us that tribunal independence is a **common law principle** of natural justice. As with all principles of natural justice, the degree of independence required at common law **could be ousted** by express statutory language or necessary statutory implication, so long as the statute is constitutionally valid. 

The only way that constitutional or constitution-like protections can be afforded to a tribunal is if the actions of the particular tribunal **trigger the protections offered by the Canadian *Charter*** or by one of the provincial or federal quasi-constitutional statutes.

**Keen v Canada**

***Ocean Port*** affirmed that a variety of tribunal appointments can satisfy the requirement of security of tenure so long as there are no constitutional standards at play and the terms of the appointment derive from constitutionally valid legislation. However, cases such as ***Keen*** show that, as a practical reality, governments still can, and do, interfere with administrative decision-making because of improper understandings about tribunal accountability.

The **third wave** of tribunal independence jurisprudence is marked by litigants reasserting a push for tribunals to have the same independence as courts.

Decided shortly after ***Ocean Port***, ***Bell Canada v. Canadian Telephone Employees Association***, [2003 SCC 36](https://canlii.ca/t/1g6pk){:target=" \_blank"} had suggested a spectrum of decision-making types in which highly adjudicative tribunals endowed with court-like powers and procedures could require more stringent requirements of procedural fairness, including a higher degree of independence.

In the 2006 BC Supreme Court decision in ***McKenzie v. Minister of Public Safety and Solicitor General et al.***, [2006 BCSC 1372](https://canlii.ca/t/1p8sw){:target=" \_blank"}, agreed with the petitioner that the unwritten constitutional guarantees of independence should be expanded to apply to residential tenancy arbitrators.

**Institutional Arrangements**

Debates over which public policy changes may bring about greater tribunal independence centre on three principal issues: 

- (1) insulation from inappropriate removal, 
- (2) reduction of interference in decision-making, and 
- (3) support and promotion of appointment and re-appointment processes that strengthen independence. 

Insulation from improper removal has been addressed by two types of policy reform. One type of reform is the **lifetime appointment**; the second type of policy reform has kept tribunals within the executive branch of gov-ernment but created **fixed terms of appointment**.

In Ontario, **clustering** (which is the bringing together of tribunals for efficiency) has also been used to reduce ac-countability connections between subject matter ministries and tribunals reviewing decisions of those ministries or their responsible ministers.

One way of addressing this challenge is to ensure not only that appointment processes are **transparent**, but also that there is a roster of competent individuals available to be selected from when openings arise on tribunals.

## 6.1 Practice Quiz

1. In ***Ocean Port***, the Supreme Court of Canada held that the appointment scheme of the Liquor Appeal Board:

    - [x] Was clearly what the legislature intended 
    - [ ] Deprived Board members of security of tenure 
    - [ ] Defined Board members as full-time government employees 
    - [ ] Was in contravention of the legislature’s intention 

2. Was a constitutional guarantee of independence found in ***Ocean Port***?
    - [x] No, because the unwritten principle of judicial independence does not extend to adjudicative functions. 
    - [ ] Yes, on the basis of S. 7 of the *Charter*. 
    - [ ] No, because S. 7 & 11 of the *Charter*, despite being argued, do not apply. 
    - [ ] None of the above. 

## 6.2 Judicial v Administrative Independence

!!! note "Readings"

    - **Lorne Sossin**, “*Administrative Law at Pleasure: Keen v. Canada*”, Faculty of Law, University of Toronto, May 31, 2009
    - edited case: ***Keen v Canada*** 2009 FC 353

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">**Module Content**</p>

Is the government legally prevented from removing administrative appointees for based on the decisions that they make?  This is the central issue in ***Keen v Canada***.

In Canada, Judicial independence (i.e. independence of the regular court system) has three key **components**:  Security of Tenure, Financial Security and Administrative Independence.  The principle of judicial independence and its components apply to regular courts in Canada.

Administrative decision-makers are a different beast, with variable standards depending upon the administrative tribunal, issues in front of the decision-maker and the enabling legislation, among other factors.

The test for administrative tribunals’ independence has evolved in Canada. In summary, it consists of an analysis of the nature of the tribunal, interests at stake, and other indices of independence.

As applied to administrative tribunals:

- ***Ocean Port:*** no freestanding constitutional guarantee of tribunal independence
- ***Keen v Canada:*** clear legislation can oust common law duty of fairness (including structural features of independence)

!!! info "Lorne Sossin, “*Administrative Law at Pleasure: Keen v. Canada*”"

    - To understand the Federal Court’s approach to Keen’s dismissal, it is necessary to briefly review how the Supreme Court altered the law governing the dismissal of public officials in ***Dunsmuir v. New Brunswick***, [2008 SCC 9](https://canlii.ca/t/1vxsm){:target=" \_blank"}.
    - ***Dunsmuir*** involved the dismissal of a court’s official in New Brunswick. The Court held that his relationship with the Government was governed by **contract**, not the **public law duty of fairness**. 
    - In reaching this conclusion, the Court made it clear that it was reversing the law as set out in ***Knight v. Indian Head School Division No. 19***, [1990 CanLII 138 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fszg){:target=" \_blank"}, which had established that the Crown owed a duty of procedural fairness in dealing with public office holders. 
    - The Court in ***Dunsmuir*** identifies situations where the private law of employment contracts may not govern or not govern completely:
        - Where a public employee is not protected by a contract of employment as in the case of judges, Minister of the Crown, and other officials who “fulfill constitutionally defined state roles.” (at para. 115)
        - Where a public office holder truly serves at pleasure in the sense of being subject to summary dismissal (at para. 115); and
        - Where a duty of fairness “flows by necessary implication from a statutory power governing the employment relationship” (at para. 116)
    - The conclusion that public office holders may be in a more vulnerable position as a result of ***Dunsmuir*** is particularly **troubling** as termination of public office holders is intimately tied to the **independence of public office holders**.
    - In ***Keen***, **Hughes J.** recognized that settings where terms of appointment allow for summary dismissal constitute a clear exception identified in ***Dunsmuir*** where procedural fairness would apply. [However], the Court held that this duty had been met because Ms. Keen had been provided notice and an opportunity to make written representations. 
    - In my view, “at pleasure” appointments are inherently inappropriate to adjudicative, oversight and accountability positions. That said, I would suggest that whether or not a position is characterized as “at pleasure,” cannot mean that it is acceptable for Government to dismiss a public office holder exercising adjudicative, oversight and accountability functions on a mere whim, or worse, because the Government disagrees with the substantive judgments of the office holder. The **issue**, in other words, is not whether Government has the right to dismiss at pleasure, but rather **the appropriateness of Government exercising the power** it has in the circumstances.

!!! info "*Keen v. Canada (Attorney General)*, [2009 FC 353](https://canlii.ca/t/2344s){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - [48] ... an appointment "at pleasure" is one that has been described by the Federal Court of Appeal in ***Pelletier v. Canada (Attorney General) (F.C.A.)***, [2008 FCA 1](https://canlii.ca/t/1vc6c){:target=" \_blank"} as "intrinsically precarious". 
    - [49] Recently the Supreme Court of Canada in ***Dunsmuir v. New Brunswick***, [2008 SCC 9](https://canlii.ca/t/1vxsm){:target=" \_blank"} had occasion to review an "at pleasure" appointment and held that certain duties of fairness were owed to a person having such an appointment before action was taken to dismiss that person. If the statutory provisions were silent, such a person has at least a right to notice of an intention to be dismissed and to make representations in that regard for consideration before a final decision as to dismissal is made. 
    - [54] If that designation was "at pleasure" the evidence shows that Ms. Keen was afforded the procedural fairness contemplated by ***Dunsmuir*** at paragraphs 115-116, *supra*. The Minister, by his letter of December 27, 2007, gave Ms. Keen notice of his intention to recommend termination of her designation as President and gave her an opportunity to make submissions.
    - [56] I am, therefore, satisfied that, if the designation of Ms. Keen as President of the Commission was "at pleasure", then the requirements of **procedural fairness have been satisfied** and the dismissal cannot be set aside.

## Discussion: 6.2 Tribunal Appointments

#### Question

In ***Ocean Port***, the court affirmed that a variety of tribunal appointments can satisfy the requirement of security of tenure so long as there are no constitutional standards at play and the terms of the appointment derive from constitutionally valid legislation.  

In ***Keen***, we see the practical reality that governments can and do interfere with administrative decision-making because of improper understandings of tribunal accountability.

How should the messages from ***Ocean Port*** and ***Keen*** be reconciled?  Discuss whether you think the decisions contradict each other on principle.  Also consider ONE of the following:

- Consider from Ocean Port whether you agree more with the Federal Court’s opinion (as excerpted in SCC decision) or whether you think the SCC’s decision was the correct one.
- Consider the argument that in Keen, the Minister misunderstood the relationship between the Executive and the Commission.  Do you agree with the Federal Court’s opinion that the Government had “carefully considered” Ms. Keen’s submission on her termination?

#### Samantha's Comment

In the BCCA ***Ocean Port*** decision, the BCCA set aside the Board’s decision and held that the Board members lacked the security of tenure necessary to ensure their independence.  

However, the SCC held that there is no constitutional guarantee of independence for tribunals because tribunals are a part of the executive. It reasoned that the constitutional protection of independence applies to the judiciary but does not extend to the tribunals. Since the primary function of the tribunals is the implementation of policy, it is up to the legislature to determine the degree of their independence. The court also affirmed that a variety of tribunal appointments can satisfy the requirement of security of tenure so long as there are no constitutional standards at play and the terms of the appointment derive from constitutionally valid legislation.

In ***Keen***, the court held that the Cabinet possessed the discretion to remove a tribunal appointee. The court determined that Ms. Keen was appointed “at pleasure” of the government.  It relied on ***Dunsmuir*** which provided that a lower level of procedural fairness is required on termination of an “**at pleasure** appointee” than on the dismissal of an appointee instated on terms of **good behaviour**. It found that the threshold for procedural protection had been met as the Minister had written in the letter to Ms. Keen regarding considering her removal, provided reasons and provided her an opportunity to respond.

#### Answer

***Ocean Port*** and ***Keen*** once again illustrate the judiciary’s reluctance to overstep into the realms of executive and legislative authority. In my view, these two cases are coherent and do not present a true conflict, at least from the court’s perspective.

In both cases, the courts demonstrated significant deference to administrative decisions. In ***Ocean Port***, the Supreme Court stated: “[W]hile tribunals may sometimes attract Charter requirements of independence, as a general rule they do not… the degree of independence required of tribunal members may be ousted by express statutory language or necessary implication. It is not open to a court to apply a common law rule in the face of clear statutory direction. Courts engaged in judicial review of administrative decisions must defer to the legislator's intention in assessing the degree of independence required of the tribunal in question.”

This deferential attitude carried over into ***Keen***, where the court concluded that “certain (lower) duties of fairness were owed to a person having such an appointment before action was taken to dismiss that person.” In Ms. Keen’s case, since her designation was “at pleasure,” the court found that the requirements of procedural fairness had been satisfied.

If a conflict exists, it lies not in the reasoning but in the undesirable implications of these precedents. ***Ocean Port*** confirmed that a variety of tribunal appointment structures may meet the requirements of security of tenure so long as no constitutional standards are violated and the terms of appointment stem from valid legislation. However, ***Keen*** reveals the practical reality that governments can, and sometimes do, interfere with administrative decision-making simply because they dislike certain outcomes.

We cannot know whether the government had truly “carefully considered” Ms. Keen’s submission regarding her dismissal. Although the Order in Council dated January 15, 2008, asserts that “the Governor in Council has carefully considered [Ms. Keen’s] submission” and that procedural fairness was therefore satisfied, it is apparent that the disagreement between the Minister and Ms. Keen was the real reason for her removal as president. If the Minister was determined to dismiss her, would Ms. Keen’s submission have been given genuine consideration or sufficient weight?

Ultimately, we cannot rely solely on a Minister’s proper understanding of tribunal or commission accountability. To safeguard independence and restore public confidence in administrative decision-making, systemic institutional arrangements are essential. Measures such as lifetime or fixed-term appointments established by enabling statutes, stronger separation between decision-makers and subject-matter ministries (as in the U.K.), tribunal clustering to reduce accountability ties between ministries and reviewing tribunals (as seen in Ontario), and more transparent, merit-based appointment processes are all worthwhile steps toward fostering a truly independent decision-making environment.

## 6.3 Rule Against Bias

!!! note "Readings"

    - Textbook, pp 268-288

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">**Module Content**</p>

We have defined bias and now we can consider the legal concept of a **reasonable apprehension of bias**.  A key point to remember is that this is a legal standard where bias of a decision-maker can be **real bias** OR merely **perceived bias**.

One of the key points to keep in mind that whenever there is a concern of bias on the part of a decision-maker, the complainant must bring the complaint to that decision-maker **at the first opportunity**. Remember that bias provides an automatic basis for judicial review and that bias **cannot be remedied by that tribunal’s decision**, even if the decision may have been otherwise correct.

One consequence of this is that courts in Canada have treated the bias of any one member of a multi-member tribunal to be disqualifying of the entire process.  In other words, there is an assumption that bias on the part of one member of a Tribunal **taints the entire** decision-making process.

**General Test for Bias**

This factor is outlined in ***Committee for Justice and Liberty et al. v. National Energy Board et al.***, [1976 CanLII 2 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1mk9k){:target=" \_blank"} (summarized at p 280 of textbook). Refer to the test from dissenting opinion by **De Grandpre J.** for assessing individual bias:

> ...the apprehension of bias must be a reasonable one, held by reasonable and right minded persons, applying themselves to the question and obtaining thereon the required information... [T]hat test is "what would an informed person, viewing the matter realistically and practically -- and having thought the matter through -- conclude. Would he think that it is more likely than not that [the decision-maker], whether consciously or unconsciously, would not decide fairly.

What would a reasonable person be likely to think of the decision (i.e. possibility of bias in the decision)? 

- The ***Baker v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)***, [1999 CanLII 699 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fqlk){:target=" \_blank"} inform what a reasonable person is likely to think in any given case. Recall that in ***Baker***, the SCC stated that a reasonable and well-informed member of the community would conclude that the Immigration reviewing officer had not approached this case with the impartiality appropriate to a decision made by an immigration officer.  

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">Textbook Summary</p>

As discussed at the beginning of this chapter, the rule against bias (the ***nemo judex*** rule) aims to maintain public confidence in the administration of justice. Like independence, the rule against bias aims to preserve the **appearance of impartiality** in the decision-making process. 

Allegations of **reasonable apprehension of bias** exist in two major forms in administrative law: 

- (1) **perceptions of individual bias**, which deal with the impartiality of individual decision-makers; and 
- (2) **perceptions of institutional bias**, which deal with the decision-making body as a whole.

The party alleging perceived bias must bring their concern to the attention of the particular decision-maker on the **first available occasion**. If the claim is successful, any decisions already made will be **quashed** and the proceedings will be **reheard** by an alternative decision-maker or a newly constituted panel.

The test for bias relies on perception. Whether bias actually exists in a decision-making context is not the question. The classic test was formulated in the 1970s in ***Justice and Liberty***. 

The grounds for the apprehension of bias must be **substantial**: a real likelihood or probability of bias should be demonstrated. Mere suspicion of bias is insufficient for the test to be met. The courts often talk of demonstrating the likelihood of bias on a **balance of probabilities**. 

**Perceptions of Individual Bias**

These are situations where the decision-maker may reasonably be perceived to have:

- a **pecuniary or material interest** in the outcome of the matter being decided; 
- personal **relationships** with those involved in the dispute;
- prior **involvement** in or **knowledge** or information about the matter in dispute; or 
- an **attitudinal predisposition** toward an outcome.

Although the common law may be unequivocal when it comes to disqualifying a decision-maker who has a **direct** pecuniary interest, it becomes more flexible when dealing with cases in which the financial interest is **indirect**.

The common law concept of **mediation privilege**, which precludes a tribunal member from adjudicating a case that he or she has mediated, is an attempt to avoid the reasonable apprehension of bias issue that may come with **prior knowledge**.

Other situations in which decision-maker’s comments have given rise to reasonable apprehension of bias include ***ex parte*** communications (that is, where the decision-maker chooses to speak privately with one party) and cases in which sexist, condescending, or other irrelevant **comments** have been made.

In the later case of ***Newfoundland Telephone***, the Supreme Court indicated that a multi-functional administrative body may attract varying standards depending on the function being performed. Administrative bodies conducting policy functions will be subject to the closed-mind standard established in ***Old St. Boniface Residents Assn. Inc. v. Winnipeg (City)***, [1990 CanLII 31 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fspc){:target=" \_blank"}; but insofar as they are conducting adjudicative functions, their actions will attract scrutiny under a reasonable apprehension of bias standard. 

**Public Advocacy, Adjudicator Diversity, and Bias**

Should public advocacy, such as academic publications, which take a specific view on an issue or area of law, be held to give rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias?

The question has remained outstanding in our jurisprudence. Concerns about attitudinal predisposition toward an outcome therefore need to be determined on a case-by-case basis and may need to be balanced against the need for diversity and diverse forms of expertise amongst adjudicators.

**Social Media and Disqualifying Bias**

While the jurisprudence on adjudicators and social media is still nascent, some tribunals provide guidance to their adjudicators on how to manage same. 

Adjudicators should not use the Internet to learn information about parties that has not come to them in the record. This long-standing principle of fairness, which requires adjudicators to decide matters from information brought to them through proper channels and processes, is reflected in the jurisprudence as well as in many tribunal member ethical guidance documents.

**Statistical Analysis of Decision-Maker Outcomes**

Can statistical analysis of decision-maker outcomes be used to demonstrate a reasonable ap-prehension of bias?

In ***I.P.P. v. Canada (Citizenship and Immigration)***, [2018 FC 123](https://canlii.ca/t/hrjrg){:target=" \_blank"}, a group of co-applicants for refugee status argued that the adjudicator should recuse himself because his record of zero percent acceptance of refugee claims over a recent three-year period showed a predisposition to decide their claim in a negative way.

The Court indicated that the statistical information provided in the report would only prompt a reasonable person to want to know more about the situation. 

**Perceptions of Institutional Bias**

Nevertheless, tribunal practices seeking similar goals have come up against adjudicative independence more recently, such as the use of jurisprudential guides to promote adjudicative efficiency and consistency. 

In a trilogy of cases, Iwa v. Consolidated-Bathurst Packaging Ltd., [1990 CanLII 132 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fsz2){:target=" \_blank"}, Tremblay v. Quebec (Commission des affaires sociales), [1992 CanLII 1135 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fscv){:target=" \_blank"} and Ellis-Don Ltd. v. Ontario (Labour Relations Board), [2001 SCC 4](https://canlii.ca/t/523k){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court set out the guidelines that tribunals should follow so that members can collaborate within their institution to promote consistency of outcome without compromising the adjudicative independence of any one decision-maker or fairness to the parties. It outlined the following conditions for the holding of such meetings so that natural justice would not be breached: 

- that consultations not be imposed on adjudicators (especially by a higher level of authority) but rather requested by the adjudicators themselves; 
- that the discussions be limited to law or policy and not factual issues; 
- that the decision-makers make their own decisions even on questions of law or policy; and 
- that the parties be given a reasonable opportunity to respond to any new ground arising from the meeting. 

## 6.3 Practice Quiz

1. Administrative case law has established 4 situations in which a reasonable apprehension of bias may arise vis-à-vis an individual decision-maker. Which one of these is NOT automatically indicative of bias and disqualifying?
    - [x] Indirect pecuniary benefit in the outcome of a decision Although this MAY be disqualifying, indirect pecuniary benefit is not automatically disqualifying.  It depends on the context and situation.  This is unlike DIRECT pecuniary interest or benefit from a decision, which is automatically disqualifying.
    - [ ] Personal relationships with those involved in the dispute 
    - [ ] An attitudinal predisposition towards an outcome 
    - [ ] Prior involvement in the matter in dispute 
    > Although this **MAY** be disqualifying, **indirect pecuniary benefit** is not automatically disqualifying. It depends on the context and situation.  This is unlike **DIRECT** pecuniary interest or benefit from a decision, which is automatically disqualifying.

2. Which of the following is indicative of bias from an Adjudicator who is a member of an administrative tribunal?
    - [ ] It depends on the Tribunal’s enabling statute 
    - [ ] Friending a person on Instagram who appears before a tribunal. 
    - [ ] Posting a derogatory comment about their own tribunal on Facebook. 
    - [x] Both are indicative of bias in all instances 

## 6.4 Reasonable Apprehension of Bias Tests - Individual & Institutional

!!! note "Readings"

    - ***Baker v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)***, [1999 CanLII 699 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fqlk){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Chrétien v. Canada (Ex-Commissioner, Commission of Inquiry into the Sponsorship Program and Advertising Activities) (F.C.)***, [2008 FC 802](https://canlii.ca/t/1z93k){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Newfoundland Telephone Co. v. Newfoundland (Board of Commissioners of Public Utilities)***, [1992 CanLII 84 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fsf0){:target=" \_blank"}

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">**Module Content**</p>

The case law covers bias on the part of an individual and also institutional bias.  **Institutional bias** in particular implies not just an individual’s feels or attitude but is based on objective guarantees that an administrative tribunal will fairly hear public complaints.  Institutional bias in other words would extend beyond a decision-maker’s subjective attitude and would implicate the status of the institution itself as an impartial tribunal.

***Baker***

[45] Procedural fairness also requires that decisions be made free from a reasonable apprehension of bias, by an impartial decision-maker. ... In my opinion, the duty to act fairly and therefore in a manner that does not give rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias applies to all immigration officers who play a significant role in the making of decisions, whether they are subordinate reviewing officers, or those who make the final decision. 

[46] The test for reasonable apprehension of bias was set out by de Grandpré J., writing in dissent, in ***Committee for Justice & Liberty v. Canada (National Energy Board)*** (1976), [1978] 1 S.C.R. 369 (S.C.C.) at p. 394:
 
> ...the apprehension of bias must be a reasonable one, held by reasonable and right minded persons, applying themselves to the question and obtaining thereon the required information... [T]hat test is "what would an informed person, viewing the matter realistically and practically -- and having thought the matter through -- conclude. Would he think that it is more likely than not that [the decision-maker], whether consciously or unconsciously, would not decide fairly."

[47] It has been held that the standards for reasonable apprehension of bias may vary, like other aspects of procedural fairness, depending on the context and the type of function performed by the administrative decision-maker involved.

***Chrétien***

[40] The content of the duty of fairness is variable and flexible. The requirements of procedural fair-ness will depend on the nature and function of the administrative board.

[66] ... It is well-established that the standard of review analysis does not apply to issues of procedural fairness ***(Canadian Union of Public Employees v. Ontario (Minister of Labour)***, [2003] 1 S.C.R. 539, 2003 SCC 29). They are always reviewed as questions of law and, as such, the applicable standard of review is **correctness** (***Dunsmuir***, *supra*). **No deference is owed when determining the fairness of the decision-maker's process.** 

[67] The standard of impartiality expected of a decision-maker is variable depending on the **role** and **function** of the decision-maker involved:

> It can be seen that there is a great diversity of administrative boards. Those that are primarily adjudicative in their functions will be expected to comply with the standard applicable to courts. ... At the other end of the scale are boards with popularly elected members such as those dealing with planning and development whose members are municipal councillors. With those boards, the standard will be much more lenient. 

***Newfoundland Telephone***

[22] Although the duty of fairness applies to all administrative bodies, the extent of that duty will depend upon the nature and the function of the particular tribunal. To ensure fairness the conduct of members of administrative tribunals has been measured against a standard of **reasonable apprehension of bias**. 


[25] Bias was considered in a different setting in ***Old St. Boniface Residents Assn. Inc. v. Winnipeg (City)***, [1990] 3 S.C.R. 1170. That case concerned a planning decision which was made by elected mu-nicipal councillors. ... **Sopinka J.** set forth the "open mind" test for this type of situation:
 
 > The party alleging disqualifying bias must establish that there is a prejudgment of the matter, in fact, to the extent that any representations at variance with the view, which has been adopted, would be futile. Statements by individual members of Council while they may very well give rise to an appearance of bias will not satisfy the test **unless** the court concludes that they are the expression of a final opinion on the matter, which cannot be dislodged.

[27] It can be seen that there is a great diversity of administrative boards. Those that are primarily adjudicative in their functions will be expected to comply with the **standard applicable to courts**. That is to say that the conduct of the members of the Board should be such that there could be no reasonable apprehension of bias with regard to their decision. At the other end of the scale are boards with popularly elected members such as those dealing with planning and development whose members are municipal councillors. With those boards, the standard will be much **more lenient**. 

[29] Further, a member of a board which performs a policy formation function should **not be susceptible to a charge of bias simply because of the expression of strong opinions prior to the hearing**. This does not of course mean that there are no limits to the conduct of board members. It is simply a confirmation of the principle that the courts must take a flexible approach to the problem so that the standard which is applied varies with the role and function of the Board which is being considered. In the end, however, **commissioners must base their decision on the evidence which is before them**. Although they may draw upon their relevant expertise and their background of knowledge and understanding, this must be applied to the evidence which has been adduced before the board.

[40] ... If there has been a denial of a right to a fair hearing it cannot be cured by the tribunal's subsequent decision. The damage created by apprehension of bias cannot be remedied. The hearing, and any subsequent order resulting from it, is void. In ***Cardinal v. Director of Kent Institution***, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 643, at p. 661, **Le Dain J.** speaking for the Court put his position in this way:

> ... I find it necessary to affirm that the denial of a right to a fair hearing must always render a decision invalid, whether or not it may appear to a reviewing court that the hearing would likely have resulted in a different decision. The right to a fair hearing must be regarded as an independent, unqualified right which finds its essential justification in the sense of procedural justice which any person affected by an administrative decision is entitled to have. It is not for a court to deny that right and sense of justice on the basis of speculation as to what the result might have been had there been a hearing.




## Discussion: 6.4 Reasonable Apprehension of Bias

#### Question

From your review of the last three cases, how will courts assess whether there was bias present in an institution or individual's decision making?  Share your views and also comment on another post.

- ***Baker v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)***, [1999 CanLII 699 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fqlk){:target=" \_blank"}
- ***Chrétien v. Canada (Ex-Commissioner, Commission of Inquiry into the Sponsorship Program and Advertising Activities) (F.C.)***, [2008 FC 802](https://canlii.ca/t/1z93k){:target=" \_blank"}
- ***Newfoundland Telephone Co. v. Newfoundland (Board of Commissioners of Public Utilities)***, [1992 CanLII 84 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fsf0){:target=" \_blank"}

#### Samantha's Comment

A test for **Reasonable apprehension of bias (RAB)** was set out by de **Grandpré J** in the dissenting opinion in ***Committee for Justice and Liberty et al. v. National Energy Board et al.***, [1976 CanLII 2 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1mk9k){:target=" \_blank"}:

> ...the apprehension of bias must be a reasonable one, held by reasonable and right minded persons, applying themselves to the question and obtaining thereon the required information... [T]hat test is "what would an informed person, viewing the matter realistically and practically -- and having thought the matter through -- conclude. Would he think that it is more likely than not that [the decision-maker], whether consciously or unconsciously, would not decide fairly.

It was then stated in ***Newfoundland Telephone*** that the standards for RAB **vary depending on the context and the type of function performed by the ADM involved**.

***Baker:*** 

At para 45, the court states: 

> …in my opinion, the duty to act fairly and therefore in a manner that does not give rise to a RAB applied to all immigration officers who play a significant role in the making of decisions, whether they are subordinate reviewing officers, or those who make the final decision. The subordinate officer plays an important part in the process, and if a person with such a central role does not act impartially, the decision itself cannot be said to have been made in an impartial manner.

The court held that the “well-informed” member of the community would perceive bias when reading Officer Lorenz’s comments, such as the way they were written (some statements all in caps) and some of the phrases therein would not “disclose the existence of an open mind or a weighing of the particular circumstances of the case free from stereotypes” (para 48), The court was concerned that Lorenz was drawing conclusions based not on the evidence before him, but on the fact that Baker was a single mother with 8 children and had a psychiatric illness.

***Chrétien:***

The court decided that after reviewing the evidence placed before them, which was public statements made by The Commission’s spokesperson, the public statements made by the Commissioner during Phase 1 hearings and after the release of the Phase 1 Report, the Commissioner’s preoccupation with media coverage, the allegations in para 77-78: 

> extent that the judicial instinct for fairness, objectivity and restraint which the Applicant was entitled to expect of him gave way to a preoccupation on his part with focusing media (and public) attention upon himself, a course of conduct which preordained unfavorable findings about the Applicant in the Report.

gave rise to a RAB.

**They viewed the comments cumulatively to hold that the Commissioner had prejudged issues and that he was not impartial** towards the applicant (para 80)

***Newfoundland Telephone:***

The court found the Board to be more legislative in nature, dealing primarily with policy issues, hence, the SCC applied the RAB “closed-mind” test and held that **strong opinions before the hearing did not necessarily equate to a RAB**, but a higher standard was necessary once the hearing began (para 36), as it held that the board member (Wells) statements “taken together, give a clear indication that not only was there a reasonable apprehension of bias, but Wells had demonstrated that he had a closed mind on the subject (para 38). The court discussed the consequences of a finding of Bias at Para 40 and determined that the denial of a right to a fair hearing cannot be cured by the tribunal’s subsequent decision. The hearing and any subsequent order resulting from it are void.

Note that a court will likely consider **a number of factors** in assessing bias, for example:

- whether the decision-maker(s) actually had discretion to make the particular decision. 
- if the apprehension of bias itself was reasonable.
- if the decision-maker(s) was open minded (***Baker*** para. 48, ***Newfoundland Telephone*** at para. 38),
- if they made conclusions before hearing all evidence (***Chretien*** at para. 81),
- if they accessed evidence properly, not obviously contradictory from a professional's assessment (e.g. psychotherapist's letter) (***Baker*** at para 48),
- if they weighted all particular circumstances free from stereotypes (***Baker*** para. 48).
- Whether the decision maker prejudged the issues. (Para 80 ***Chrétien***) 
- The role of the immigration officers in the decision-making process, regardless of the job position. (***Baker***)
- Whether the notes of the immigration officer constitute the reasons for the administrative decision (***Baker***)
- "What would an informed person, viewing the matter realistically and practically, and having thought the matter through, conclude.” (Grandpre J. in ***Justice & Liberty***:)
- The context and the type of function performed by the administrative decision-maker (***Newfoundland Telephone***)
- Whether the decision is supported by the evidence or by personal matters
- The way in which the reasons are written – In ***Baker***, the immigration officer highlighted in capital letter the number of Ms Baker’s children.
- The nature, the mandate and the function of the administrative decision-maker under the enabling statute. (***Chretien***).
- The applicable standard will vary depending on the role and function of the Board being considered (***Newfoundland***):
    - **Boards with adjudicative functions:** standard similar to courts: reasonable apprehension of bias
    - **Boards with elected board members** and boards dealing with planning and development whose members are municipal councillors: lower standard
    - **Administrative boards that deal with policy:** lower standard like the boards composed of municipal councillors.
- Whether the decision-makers make comments or conclusions related to the proceeding prior to hearing all the evidence and all testimonies.
- Whether the decision-maker make public statements indicated a close mind position during hearing stage. At the investigative stage, the “closed mind” test is applicable and at hearing stage a higher standard is to be applied (***Newfoundland***)  

#### Answer

Omitted, because it cannot be better than Samantha's comment. 

