---
layout: post
title: L509 Unit 5
date: 2025-10-20
draft: false
categories:
  - Law
tags:
  - Administrative Law
  - LAW_V 509 99A 2025W1
  - Unit 5
---

# Accessing Administrative Justice

## 5.0 Overview

Individual and group rights are affected by administrative decision-makers through policies and decisions. Procedural fairness is incredibly important in the context of safeguarding **rights** in administrative law, however accessing those rights become moot if the public cannot access administrative justice **procedures**.

The constraints on accessing administrative justice are many and include **financial constraints**, **time-consuming processes** and often the **complexity** of the process and **uncertain chances of success**.

## 5.1 Principle of access to justice/access to remedy

!!! note "Readings"

    - Textbook, pp **426-455**
    - ***Finlay v. Canada (Minister of Finance)***, [1986 CanLII 6](https://canlii.ca/t/1ftpf){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Filgueira v. Garfield Container Transport Inc.***, [2006 FC 785](https://canlii.ca/t/1nq5m){:target=" \_blank"}

The concept of “fairness” in this area is broken into several components in the textbook. In this Module, we focus on three issues relating to access to administrative justice.

**1. Standing**

In Canadian administrative law, standing or _locus standi_ refers to the ability of someone challenging an administrative decision to prove to the court **sufficient connection and harm** from the administrative decision that would support that party's participation in the case.

The issue of standing doesn’t arise in most judicial review cases since the individual challenging the decision is usually the main target of the decision. Further, in Canada **standing to challenge administrative decisions** is generally **governed by the terms of an enabling statute**, which can be narrow or broad.

**Public interest standing** in Canada is available in Constitutional and non-Constitutional cases. We are focusing in this topic on non-Constitutional cases. Standing issues can arise through common-law and statutory challenges in two broad ways:

- (1) An administrative decision may affect a large section of the public without specifically targeting a single individual; and
- (2) An administrative decision may affect broad interests in unique ways and someone other than a targeted individual applies for judicial review.

**_Finlay_** is the Supreme Court of Canada case that **extended** the domain of public interest standing from a **constitutional** to a general **administrative** law basis.

In **_Finlay_**, the Supreme Court of Canada adopted the reasoning in its previous decision **_Thorson v. Attorney General of Canada_**, [1974 CanLII 6 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1twxf){:target=" \_blank"} to justify the **recognition of public interest standing in purely administrative law cases**. The SCC held that courts should have discretion to recognize the standing of a public interest litigant.

The main considerations in analyzing this are:

- (a) whether or not there is a **justiciable issue**, reflecting "concern about the proper role of the courts and their constitutional relationship with the other branches of government."
- (b) whether or not the challenge involves a **serious issue** raised by someone with a "genuine" interest in its determination, reflecting a "concern about the allocation of scarce judicial resources and the need to screen out the mere busybody."
- (c) whether or not there is any other "**reasonable and effective manner** in which the issue may be brought before a court", reflecting the concern that the "courts should have the benefit of the contending points of view by those most directly affected by them."

**2. Communication (Language)**

There are constitutional guarantees for availability of language interpretation for certain areas of law, under Section 14 of the Charter (such as in criminal cases), however in the administrative law context, the situation is quite different. Courts often **defer to administrative** tribunals and their discretion in determining the availability of translation services and information availability in different languages.

The case excerpt of **_Filgueira_** deals with the issue of **language and accessibility** relating to information about administrative decision-making services. It also touches on some difficult issues such as the financial implications and responsibility for who pays for the production of language translation services and related information.

**3. Financial Costs**

Too much emphasis on procedures can compromise other values that are important in delivering government services and programs. There is the possibility of delaying important government decisions that might prejudice the public interest. In addition, administrative process such as holding hearings can cost more money to both the administrative agency and participants. The inherent delays in some hearings may render the ultimate outcome more costly.

The financial stresses put on individual claimants during an administrative law process is a growing concern for the Canadian legal community. One of the responses, at the provincial level, has been for greater power and discretion afforded to administrative tribunals to develop their own costs schemes.

As the text notes at p. 366, [s. 47(1) of the _B.C. Administrative Tribunals Act_](https://www.bclaws.gov.bc.ca/civix/document/id/complete/statreg/04045_01#section47){:target=" \_blank"} allows for B.C. administrative tribunals to develop their own cost schemes. Note that while s. 47(1) says “Subject to the regulations” no such regulations have been enacted.

The decision of the **BC Farm Industry Review Board** in _B.C. Vegetable Greenhouse v BC Vegetable Marketing Commission_ considers with this complex issue. As you read the decision, note the Review Board’s consideration that **administrative tribunals have no inherent power to award costs**, and that **the power to award costs must be found either expressly or by implication in a tribunal’s enabling statute**.

### Chapter 16 FAIRNESS IN CONTEXT: ACHIEVING FAIRNESS THROUGH ACCESS TO ADMINISTRATIVE JUSTICE

We approach our topic from three overarching perspectives:

- Access to the tribunal
- Access to legal or other knowledge necessary to obtain tribunal services
- Access to resources needed to navigate tribunal system

**ACCESS TO ADMINISTRATIVE JUSTICE: THE TRIBUNAL**

In **_Baker_** the Supreme Court of Canada noted that the bedrock underlying virtually all questions of fairness in administrative procedures is the requirement that administrative decisions are made using procedures appropriate to the decision-making context, with an opportunity for those affected by the decision to put forward their views and evidence fully and have them considered by the decision-maker.

**A. STANDING**

Tribunals, unlike courts, have no inherent jurisdiction. The standing to bring a matter to a tribunal **must be found in the tribunal’s governing statute** (or some other statutory authority).

The enabling statute sets the parameters for access, but it also provides a measure of **discretion to the Board** to determine both who is directly affected by its proceedings and what amounts to an adequate opportunity to be heard.

In **_Delta Air Lines Inc. v. Lukács_**, [2018 SCC 2](https://canlii.ca/t/hpv4d){:target=" \_blank"}, Dr Gábor Lukács filed a complaint with the Canadian Transportation Agency alleging that Delta Air Lines discriminated in its approach to seating and accommodating obese persons. Dr Lukács did not bring the complaint on his own behalf but as a public interest litigant.

A majority of the Supreme Court found that, in dismissing Dr Lukács’ complaint in this man-ner, the Agency unreasonably interpreted both the jurisprudence on public interest standing and the broad remedial authority afforded to it under its enabling legislation.

Under the historical regime of prerogative writs, standing was limited to those **directly affected** by state action.

Judicial review of administrative action is generally reserved for those who are found to have a sufficient legally recognized interest in the matter to justify the judicial review application. It is said that the test for standing is whether the applicant is a “**person aggrieved**” by the administrative decision. It has been said that a person aggrieved is one who will suffer some “**peculiar grievance of their own beyond some grievance suffered by them in common with the rest of the public**.”

The general policy of the court is not to decide issues in the **absence** of the parties whose rights are most directly affected by the court’s decision.

One of the most **significant developments** in Canadian public law is the concept of discretionary public interest standing, which may allow a “test” applicant or non-governmental organization to launch judicial review proceedings on behalf of a broader group.

Where the vulnerability of a disadvantaged group prevents members of that group from accessing the courts, it may be appropriate for public interest organizations to step forward. This was the situation in the leading case on public interest standing, **_Canada (Attorney General) v. Downtown Eastside Sex Workers United Against Violence Society_**, [2012 SCC 45](https://canlii.ca/t/fss7s){:target=" \_blank"}.

the Supreme Court of Canada indicated that a liberal approach to the issue of public interest standing may frequently best serve the interests of justice. The **_Downtown Eastside_** case affirmed the test for determining standing that had previously been established in the jurisprudence, but underscored that the **discretion to grant public interest standing** should be exercised in a broad, generous, and liberal manner.

The test for public interest standing remains **threefold**:

1. Is the matter serious and justiciable?
2. Is the party seeking standing genuinely interested in the matter?
3. Is there any other reasonable and effective way for the matter to be adjudicated?

In previous cases, the **3rd factor** had been viewed as a strict requirement that the party seeking standing had to establish that there was essentially **no other** reasonable and effective manner in which the issue could be brought before the courts. The Supreme Court of Canada, however, concluded that the 3rd factor would be better expressed as requiring that the proposed proceeding be, in light of various pragmatic considerations, a reasonable and effective means of bringing the case to court.

Writing for the Court, **Cromwell J** articulated:

> The court should consider whether the case is of public interest in the sense that it transcends the interests of those most directly affected by the challenged law or action.

<p class="highlight blue" markdown="1">The tension between fairness and efficiency is an enduring theme in settings of access to administrative justice. **On the one hand**, expanding the scope of those entitled to participate in judicial review processes may be resisted on the basis that the increased complexity and evidentiary burden this places on the courts belies the very purpose of administrative efficiency and judicial review. **On the other hand**, any substantive understanding of fairness reveals that vulnerable populations may frequently be both unable and unwilling to shoulder the heavy burden of challenging laws that may very well infringe important, constitutionally protected rights. </p>

**B. HEARINGS**

Full oral hearings are **not required in all** administrative law contexts; rather, the specific format of proceedings that tribunals incorporate into their decision-making processes, and the discretion available to tribunals to control their processes, will normally be set out in empowering statutes.

**ACCESS TO ADMINISTRATIVE JUSTICE: INFORMATION AND KNOWLEDGE**

**A. GUIDELINES**

While transparency calls for tribunals to develop and publicize **guidelines** on which parties may rely, the principles of administrative law may limit the effectiveness of that reliance by requiring that a tribunal **not** treat its own guidelines as **binding**.

While guidelines may not be binding, they frequently represent a distillation, simplification, and operationalization of existing case law and legal principles. So, decision-makers who stray from them may be found to have committed legal errors in having done so.

Supreme Court in **_Vavilov_** noted that “where a decision maker does depart from longstanding practices or established internal authority, it bears the justificatory **burden of explaining** that departure in its reasons."

**B. SIMPLIFICATION**

**C. LANGUAGE**

Since **_R. v. Tran_**, [1994 CanLII 56 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1frqw){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada has adopted a contextual approach to s. 14 of the _Charter_, which provides, “A party or witness in any proceedings who does not understand or speak the language in which the proceedings are conducted or who is deaf has the **right to the assistance of an interpreter**."

In **_Tran_**, the Court makes it clear that not every error of translation or interpretation provided to an accused individual will constitute a violation of the _Charter_. Further, the Court holds that the error must be one that goes to the “**vital interests**” of the accused and, therefore, even a serious problem with translation on a minor point (e.g., a scheduling motion) will not constitute a violation.

The right to an interpreter (and, by extension, to translation of relevant material) in the administrative context was considered in **_Filgueira v. Garfield Container Transport Inc._**, [2006 FC 785](https://canlii.ca/t/1nq5m){:target=" \_blank"}.

**D. PRIOR DECISIONS**

In most cases, making available a tribunal’s past decisions is seen as a key aspect of its public interest function. Absent circumstances justifying confidentiality, all tribunal proceedings should be **open to the public**, and documents used in those proceedings should be available to the public.

Unlike a court, tribunals are **not bound** by their earlier decisions. Many tribunals in practice, however, aim for **consistency** and will treat previous decisions as strongly influential over similar disputes.

**ACCESS TO RESOURCES NEEDED TO NAVIGATE THE TRIBUNAL SYSTEM**

Three potential barriers: legal representation, fees and costs, and the budgeting and staffing of tribunals.

**A. LEGAL REPRESENTATION**

In the criminal justice sphere, a right to state-funded legal representation has been long recognized. In **_New Brunswick (Minister of Health and Community Services) v. G. (J.)_**, [1999 CanLII 653 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fqjw){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada affirmed that the constitutional **right to legal assistance** extends beyond the correctional context.

It is important to recognize that the **right to counsel** is not the same as the **right to state-funded counsel**.

In **_R. v. G.D.B._**, [2000 SCC 22](https://canlii.ca/t/526g){:target=" \_blank"} the Supreme Court of Canada endorsed the view that where counsel **fails to provide effective representation**, the legitimacy of an ensuing decision,in both outcome and process, is compromised and may result in a **miscarriage of justice**.

Generally, however, the courts have concluded that the incompetence of counsel will only constitute a breach of natural justice in “**extraordinary** circumstances” in **_Memari v. Canada (Citizenship and Immigration)_**, [2010 FC 1196](https://canlii.ca/t/2dq0v){:target=" \_blank"}.

However, it is also important to recognize that access to legal representation is **not the norm** in many administrative law contexts and that fair procedures will not always depend on such access.

**B. LAW, TECHNOLOGY, AND ACCESS**

**C. FEES AND COSTS**

Where a tribunal is deciding a dispute between two or more parties, should the winning parties be able to claim costs against the losing parties as in civil courts?

In **_Canada (Canadian Human Rights Commission) v. Canada (Attorney General)_**, [2011 SCC 53](https://canlii.ca/t/fnl47){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada held that no reasonable interpretation of the relevant statutory provisions could support the view that the Tribunal had the authority to award legal costs in matters that come before it. As such, it would appear that a tribunal will generally only have the authority to **award costs where such authority is explicitly set out in its enabling legislation**.

**D. BUDGET AND STAFFING**

While the government may not be under a legal obligation to create tribunals, once it has chosen to do so, it may well be under a legal obligation to provide adequate funding to ensure fairness, the rule of law, and access to justice before these tribunals.

In rejecting the government’s warning that requiring oral hearings for all refugee claims would be costly, Wilson J stated in **_Singh v. Minister of Employment and Immigration_**, [1985 CanLII 65 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fv22){:target=" \_blank"}:

> No doubt considerable time and money can be saved by adopting administrative procedures which ignore the principles of fundamental justice but such an argument, in my view, misses the point of the exercise under s 1 [of the *Charter*].

**CONCLUSION**

Accessibility requires resources, and given the high volume of some tribunals, the resource implications may be quite substantial.

In addition to resources, a robust approach to fairness may also depend on how a tribunal accommodates unequal power and resources between parties.

Access also involves the balance between fairness and efficiency.

Access to administrative justice includes not just standing, guidelines, fees, and representation, but also extends to whether decisions are well reasoned and delivered in a timely fashion.

!!! info "_Finlay v. Canada (Minister of Finance)_, [1986 CanLII 6](https://canlii.ca/t/1ftpf){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - Legal issues: 
        - Does the respondent have a sufficient personal interest in the legality of the federal cost-sharing payments to bring him within the general requirement for **standing** to challenge an exercise of statutory authority by an action for a declaration or an injunction?
            - I am on balance of the view that the relationship between the prejudice allegedly caused to the respondent by the provincial non-compliance with the conditions and undertakings imposed by the Plan and the alleged illegality of the federal payments is too indirect, remote or speculative to be a sufficient causative relationship for standing under the general rule.
        - If not, does the Court have a discretion to recognize **public interest standing** in the circumstances of the present case?
    - Only the **Attorney General** has **traditionally** been regarded as having standing to assert a purely public right or interest by the institution of proceedings for declaratory or injunctive relief of his  [*618]  own motion or on the relation of another person. His exercise of discretion as to whether or not to give his consent to relator proceedings is **not reviewable** by the courts. In such a case a **private individual** may not sue for declaratory or injunctive relief without the consent of the Attorney General **unless** he can show what amounts to a **sufficient private or personal interest** in the subject matter of the proceedings.
    - **Buckley J.** in ***Boyce v. Paddington Borough Council***, [[1903] 1 Ch. 109](https://www.uniset.ca/other/css/19031Ch109.html){:target=" \_blank"} stated the rule as follows at p. 114:
        - A plaintiff can sue without joining the Attorney General in two cases: **first**, where the interference with the public right is such that some **private right** of his is at the same time interfered with; and, **secondly**, where no private right is interfered with, but the plaintiff, in respect of his public right, suffers **special damage peculiar to himself** from the interference with the public right.
    - The "private right" referred to by Buckley J. has been said to be "a right the invasion of which gives rise to an actionable wrong within the categories of private law, for example, a breach of contract or trust or the commission of a tort".
    - The nature of the interest reflected by the words "special damage peculiar to himself" in the second exception in ***Boyce*** has been variously characterized in the cases. in ***Thorson v. Attorney General of Canada***, [1974 CanLII 6 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1twxf){:target=" \_blank"}, **Duff J.** referred to the general rule as follows at p. 337: "An individual, for example, has no status to maintain an action restraining a wrongful violation of a public right unless he is **exceptionally prejudiced by the wrongful act**." Schroeder J.A. said in ***Cowan v. Canadian Broadcasting Corporation***, [1966 CanLII 225 (ON CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/g18b5){:target=" \_blank"} at p. 311: "A plaintiff, in attempting to restrain, control or confine within proper limits, the act of a public or quasi-public body which affects the public generally, is an outsider **unless he has sustained special damage** or can show that he has some "**special interest, private interest, or sufficient interest**". 
    - However, the expression "special damage peculiar to himself", in my opinion should be regarded as equivalent in meaning to "**have a special interest in the subject matter of the action**".
    - I am of the opinion, however, that a similar requirement of **directness or causal relationship** between the alleged prejudice or grievance and the challenged action is implicit in the notions of interference with private right and special damage.
    - After rejecting the standing on private right or peculiar damage grounds, the second question is: 
        - Does the approach to **public interest standing** in those cases, ***Thorson***, ***Nova Scotia Board of Censors v. McNeil***, [1975 CanLII 14 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1mzjb){:target=" \_blank"} and ***Minister of Justice (Can.) v. Borowski***, [1981 CanLII 34 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1mjm0){:target=" \_blank"}, apply to a **non-constitutional challenge** to the statutory authority for administrative action?
    - **Thurlow C.J.** expressed his conclusion in the following passages of his reasons for judgment in ***MacIlReith v. Hart***, [1908 CanLII 64 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/fsmfx){:target=" \_blank"} at pp.  527-28
        - In such circumstances one may wonder why the law should prevent a person who is one of the class of intended beneficiaries of the Canada Assistance Plan and who alleges that he is not getting the standard of assistance it intends because Manitoba does not provide it, from bringing an action to have the issue of the legality of payments to Manitoba under the Act resolved.
    - In ***Borowski***, **Martland J.**, summed up what ***Thorson*** and ***McNeil*** stood for as follows at p. 598:
        - I interpret these cases as deciding that to establish status as a plaintiff in a suit seeking a declaration that legislation is invalid, if there is a serious issue as to its invalidity, a person need only to show that he is affected by it directly or that he has a genuine interest as a citizen in the validity of the legislation and that there is no other reasonable and effective manner in which the issue may be brought before the Court.
    - I take that to be an indication that the Court was **not purporting** in ***Thorson***, ***McNeil*** and ***Borowski*** to lay down a rule or principle respecting public interest standing that extended beyond a challenge to the constitutionality of legislation. ... however, that they do **not clearly exclude such recognition**.
    - In my view an affirmative answer should be given to this question. For the reasons indicated in ***Thorson***, I do not think that Attorney General's refusal to act in such a case should bar a court from the recognition, as a matter of discretion in accordance with the criteria affirmed in ***Borowski***, of public interest standing in a private individual to institute proceedings. 
    - If the respondent is recognized as having standing to seek the **declaratory relief** then I cannot see why he should not be recognized as also having standing to seek the ancillary **injunctive relief**. Whether a plaintiff should be granted either declaratory relief or injunctive relief in a particular case is a matter of judicial discretion to be exercised according to criteria and considerations which are somewhat different for the two forms of relief. 

!!! info "*Filgueira v. Garfield Container Transport Inc.*, [2006 FC 785](https://canlii.ca/t/1nq5m){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - [36] Thus the **right to an interpreter**, even in a criminal law context, is **not absolute**. Courts should be generous and open-minded on the topic. There appears to be greater concern where the situation involves the giving of evidence and understanding the proceedings.
    - [38] It is **within the discretion of the Tribunal** to determine whether such an objective (the removal of discrimination) can be fairly achieved in the absence of providing, in whole or during part of the process, translation services into a language other than an official language, at taxpayer's expense, to one or more of the parties.

## 5.2 Access to Justice - Case Study: BC Civil Resolution Tribunal

Access to Justice issues in Canadian law has required some innovating thinking, utilizing new technologies. **Online Dispute Resolution** (ODR) is a new tool used in British Columbia to members of the public settle disputes in small claims court and administrative law online, without going to court.

Salter, 114:

> The *Civil Resolution Tribunal* (**CRT**) is Canada’s first online tribunal and, currently, the only ODR system in the world that is fully integrated into the justice system. The **CRT** allows the public to resolve their condominium property and small claims disputes fairly, quickly, and affordably. [Strata, or condominium property, is a form of shared ownership over land.]  The **CRT** provides the public with access to interactive information pathways, tools, and a variety of dispute resolution methods including negotiation, facilitation and, if necessary, adjudication. Participants use all of these ODR services from a computer or mobile device at a time that is convenient for them. For those who are unable or unwilling to use technology to resolve their dispute, the tribunal provides paper-based or telephone-based services.

## 5.3 Summary

The concept of “administrative justice” can be difficult to define, and often more difficult to achieve in practice.  However, **innovative processes** such as the CRT are designed to help further the ability of members of the public to access administrative dispute resolution without the complexity and costs of going through a traditional court or in-hearing process.

 
