---
layout: post
title: L509 Unit 3
date: 2025-09-26
draft: false
categories:
  - Law
tags:
  - Administrative Law
  - LAW_V 509 99A 2025W1
  - Unit 3
---

# Delegating Administrative Power & Administrative Law Remedies

## 3.1 Delegating Administrative Power through Regulations and Rule-Making

!!! note "Readings"

    - Textbook, pp 103-127
    - *Att. Gen. of Can. v. Inuit Tapirisat et al.*, [1980 CanLII 21](https://canlii.ca/t/1mjvm){:target=" \_blank"}

Delegating administrative power is achieved through delegated legislation. As we’ll see below and in your readings it takes the form of rules such as government regulations and municipal by-laws or policies issued by tribunals and agencies.

**Primary legislation:** Acts or Statutes of Legislature

**Secondary legislation** (also called delegated legislation or subordinate legislation): granting of additional law-making powers to another branch of government by an Act or statute.

It’s important to get two concepts from the textbook readings (pp 105-106) very clear:

- **Rules:** Legally binding requirements; Parliament/Legislature grants power to a decision-maker to make rules. Includes regulations, by-laws and some Cabinet orders-in-council.
- **Soft law:** Not legally binding; Administrative decision-makers develop guidelines or policies which are termed soft law. Although not legally binding, they are persuasive in decision-making.

It’s useful to review why legislators – Canadians’ elected democratic representatives – delegate power to unelected administrative decision-makers. The typical reason is the need for **expertise** in making a decision.

Another reason that is less openly discussed, but can be a relevant factor in delegating power, is that it may be **less politically risky**.

The **risk** here, however, is that an administrative decision-maker may not necessarily follow intent of legislators who delegated power to them. This is the **principal (Legislatures)-agent (administrative decision-makers) problem**.

How effective is this **public consultation** process as a surrogate for **legislative debate**? Does the public really get to participate in the process or is it dominated by special interest lobbying groups that may not act in the general public interest? These consultation procedures are nominally democratic since they’re supposed to be open to the general public and in theory are not supposed to be open to political manipulation by governments.

An actor that can limit the application of both rules and soft law is the court. Court review, or judicial review, aims to ensure that administrative decision-makers **do not exceed the powers** conferred to them by legislatures. We are focusing on judicial review of process here, and courts can review procedures relating to the creation or substance of both rules and soft law. **Concepts like procedural fairness doesn’t necessarily apply to rules** and this is pertinent to this topic’s case, _Inusit Tapirisat of Canada_.

!!! note "Practice Quiz"

    1. What is required for a decision to be “legislative” in nature?[Select the one that is **NOT** a requirement]

          - [ ] Body making the decision does not have to be the legislature
          - [x] Decision must be “legislative” in character and aimed a specific, single party.
          - [ ] Decision itself must be “legislative” in character at aimed generally at the public.

    2. Reading the SCC decision in *Inuit*, what would you say most accurately captures the Court’s view on the limits to the reach of procedural fairness obligations:

          - [ ] the Supreme Court stated that the threshold had indeed been completely eliminated
          - [ ] the Supreme Court stated that the threshold had been raised
          - [ ] the Supreme Court stated that the threshold stayed the same
          - [x] the Supreme Court stated that the threshold had been lowered

## 3.2 Orders-in-Council

!!! note "Case Reading"

    *Thorne's Hardware Ltd. v. The Queen*, [1983 CanLII 20](https://canlii.ca/t/1lpd8){:target=" \_blank"}

Under Canadian law, the terms “delegated legislation” or “subordinate legislation” are used to refer to a legislative instrument made by an entity under a power delegated to the entity by legislature. The reason these instruments are called "subordinate legislation" is because although they are **made by the Governor-in-Council**, they are **subordinate to (and limited by) Parliament**. Provincial orders-in-council, orders of the lieutenant-governor-in-councils, function similarly to federal ones.

Some of the most common forms of delegated legislation at the federal level in Canada involve orders (regulations) made by the Governor in Council. This is called an **Order-in-Council**. Although it is issued by the executive (i.e. the Governor-General) it is a **legislative instrument**. These types of orders require a statute (legislation) from Parliament conferring the authority.

[Orders In Council - Search](https://orders-in-council.canada.ca/index.php?lang=en){:target=" \_blank" .md-button }

Although Courts may involve themselves in limiting administrative decision-making, they are often **reluctant to interfere** in this area for a number of reasons. The most vivid illustration of Canadian courts' reluctance to intervene in a substantive ultra vires assessment of delegated legislation remains _Thorne's Hardware Ltd. v. The Queen_.

!!! note "Samantha's Comment"

    In *Thorne's Hardware*, the court was reviewing an Order in Council that extended the port boundaries.  *Thorne's* argued that the expansion was beyond the powers of the Governor in Council because it was passed for improper motives.

    The court notes at the outset that just because a statutory power is vested in the Governor in Council doesn't mean that it's beyond judicial review.  However, the court seems to limit itself to reviewing issues of law and jurisdiction.  For example, whether the Governor in Council had the proper legal authority to do what they did.

    Here, Cabinet had statutory authority to determine the harbour boundaries - this authority is written right into the National Harbour Board Act.  The court was unwilling to consider Cabinet's motives - they said that wasn't their job.  Governments don't publish the reasons for their decisions. **"The issue of harbour extension was one of economic policy and politics; and not one of jurisdiction and jurisprudence."**

    In summary then, we have the *Roncarelli* court which **DID** consider what the motives were behind the decision and then whether that motive/purpose was within the scope of the authority provided by statute.  We then have the *Thorne* court that assessed whether the decision was within the scope of statutory authority **WITHOUT** considering the reasoning behind the decision (although they do seem to keep the possibility open in cases of "egregious" or "compelling grounds").  What this latter decision shows is that when it comes to "delegated legislation" (an Order in Council), the judiciary is much **more reluctant to interfere**.

## 3.3 Introduction to Tribunal Remedies

Historically, most administrative law remedies in common law jurisdictions involved the common law remedy of **prerogative writs**.  In Canada today these are referred to as extraordinary remedies, issued on courts’ inherent powers to enforce court orders.  However, the form of decision granting an extraordinary remedy is still called a writ.

In 1970 jurisdiction for remedies of federal administrative decision-makers was given to the new **Federal Court** of Canada.  In general, provincial administrative tribunals are overseen by the **Ministries of the Attorney-General** of the respective provinces.

Modern era remedies available in Canadian administrative law can be broadly divided into two categories: 

- **Tribunal remedies**. This generally includes internal appeals within the decision-making body and external appeals to other administrative decision-makers or tribunals.
    - **Jurisdiction:** Tribunals do not have the general jurisdiction that Canadian courts possess. The enabling legislation should specify the Tribunal’s powers to enforce its decisions. Many tribunals cannot enforce their own orders relating to fines or imprisonment, which must then be enforced through the courts. 
    - **Structural Composition & Mandate:** Tribunals may have a single decision-maker or several decision-makers. In general they may have different types of members than Courts do. It’s not always required for these decision-makers to be practicing lawyers. On the other hand many administrative tribunals recruit or have appointed individuals with specific expertise in the relevant subject matter area. 
- **Court remedies** or **judicial review**.


## 3.4 Enforcement & Appeal of Tribunal Remedies

!!! note "Readings"

    Textbook, pp **49-53** (III, IV)


- **Tribunal Seeking to Enforce its Order**
    - This **rarely** occurs. Other administrative tribunals can enforce monetary orders through things such as liens and wage garnishments provided that the enabling statute grants such powers to the Tribunal.  The more common situation faced when trying to enforce an administrative order is an application to a Court of law for its enforcement.  This process is described as **converting an administrative order into a court order**.
    - While legislatures in Canada have increasingly sought to limit the availability of judicial review for administrative decisions, they are much less opposed to **judicial enforcement of those administrative decisions**.
- **Party Seeks to Enforce a Tribunal’s Order**
    - This is a private court action. A party that succeeds in an administrative action may also try to bring a court action against the other party to enforce the order.  This is an exceptional way to enforce a tribunal’s order because **courts are unlikely to grant a private action** to enforce a tribunal’s order in the absence of explicit statutory authority.   
- **Criminal Prosecution**
    - Enabling statutes for tribunals can create **quasi-criminal offences** for disobeying a tribunal decision or order. Criminal prosecution is also possible and the text notes **S. 127(1)** of the *Criminal Code*.  Note that the *Criminal Code* offence **excludes criminal punishment for monetary orders** and is only available in instances where Canadian law provides no other penalty. 


Three avenues to challenge tribunal decisions without going to Court:

- The most common method to challenge a tribunal’s decision is through an **internal review** process. Usually in these cases, the Tribunal is part of a larger administrative agency that had multiple levels for reviewing administrative applications.
- Another common out-of-court method for public complaints about an administrative decision is to a federal or provincial **ombudsperson**. 


## 3.5 Introduction to Judicial Remedies

!!! note "Readings"

    Textbook, pp **53-56**

Courts can become involved in examining administrative decisions through two avenues:  **Appealing to courts via enabling statutory guidelines** or via **judicial review**.

If there isn’t an explicit provision in an enabling statute for appealing to the courts, then the only court remedy potentially available is that of judicial review.

Sometimes, the statutory appeal route is available only with the permission of the administrative decision-maker.  This is a statutory **right of appeal with leave**.

Even when an application for permission is made to appeal an administrative decision to a court, **a stay of proceedings is not automatic**.


## 3.6 Judicial Review: Availability & Alternatives

!!! note "Readings"

    - Textbook, pp **56-62**
    - Domtar Inc. v. Quebec (Commission d'appel en matière de lésions professionnelles), [1993 CanLII 106](https://canlii.ca/t/1fs1k){:target=" \_blank"}


### Discretionary Basis for Refusing a Remedy

The key principle to remember here is that although Courts may judicially review an administrative decision, they can refuse to do so.

There are statutory provisions relating to Courts that use discretionary provisions relating to Judicial Review.  For example, Section 18.1(3) of the Federal Courts Act (R.S.C., 1985, c. F-7) states that “on an application for judicial review, the Federal Court **may**” make certain orders in the nature of remedies.

One of the important discretionary grounds for refusing to undertake judicial review is that there is an **adequate alternative** available. In exercising their discretion to undertake judicial review, courts consider not only any available alternative, but also judicial review’s **suitability** in the circumstances. 

So, the question to be answered is not only is there an “adequate alternative” available but also whether judicial review is appropriate in the circumstances.  This is referred to as a “**balance of convenience**” analysis, taking into account the tribunal’s enabling statute’s policies and purposes and the effect of any remedy on the parties. 

The case of ***Domtar Inc v Quebec*** illustrates the tensions between upholding some judicial principles, such as the rule of law, on the one hand, and being sensitive to the principles of federalism and division of powers on the other. Some other key points to remember from Domtar are:

- An administrative decision is not necessarily tainted just because it is inconsistent with previous rulings of the particular administrative decision-maker or tribunal;
- **Inconsistency** of treatment, in itself, is not a general ground of judicial review.

The Court has also gone on to state that, as it impacts on the rule of law, discretionary power to refuse judicial review must be exercised with care. 

> “in 1999, then Chief Justice McLachlin's set forth a vision of a "new rule of law, which would: [make] it possible for institutions other that courts to play key roles in maintaining it. It opens the door to the idea that courts do not necessarily have a monopoly on the values of reasons and fairness... [C]ontrary to Dicey's view that the court primary role is to constrain, limit and, if possible eliminate administrative power, the **new Rule of Law** allows courts to **respect and advance the roles of administrative tribunals**. The courts' role shifts from being a brute guardian of an artificial and restrictive Rule of Law to that of a partner.”


### 2. Is Judicial Review Available?

Judicial Review’s availability also involves answering several threshold questions. One of the most basic threshold questions is whether the decision being challenged was made by **a public body**. 

A very general definition of a public body would be any federal, provincial or local government or one of those entities’ department, agency or other instrumentality.

Some provincial and federal statutes define what constitutes a “public body.” Freedom of information and privacy legislation often contains such a definition.

Key points from your readings on threshold questions that must be addressed are:

- **Standing:** In most cases, challenges to an administrative decision will be made from a party to the decision and will be straight-forward.  However, there is also “public interest standing” from which individuals or organizations can challenge a decision on behalf of others.  The Supreme Court of Canada has developed a **3-part test**, where an organization must demonstrate that
    - there is a serious **justiciable issue** raised,
    - they have a real **stake** or a genuine **interest** in that issue, and
    - the proposed application is a **reasonable** and **effective** way to bring that issue before the Court.
- **Avenue of Judicial Review:** Choice of reviewing court (e.g. provincial or federal) would generally be determined by the tribunal’s source of authority and subject-matter.
- **Adhering to deadlines:** Self-explanatory, although time limits for various judicial review processes can be contained in a bewildering number of statutes and provisions.
- **Exhausting all other remedies:** All other means to challenge the administrative decision must be exhausted before a decision can be subjected to judicial review.  






