---
layout: post
title: L509 Unit 2
date: 2025-09-17
draft: false
categories:
  - Law
tags:
  - Administrative Law
  - LAW_V 509 99A 2025W1
  - Unit 2
---

#  The Rule of Law

## 2.0 Overview

the basic concept of the rule of law: it is supposed to ensure that law limits the arbitrary exercise of power.  

As we’ve reviewed in the previous module, the expansion of executive powers through delegation, combined with the vagueness of statutory instruments, creates some challenges in limiting the exercise of administrative power. 


## 2.1 The Rule of Law: Arbitrariness & Legality

!!! note "Read"

    - *Canada (Attorney General) v. PHS Community Services Society*, [2011 SCC 44](https://canlii.ca/t/fn9cf){:target=" \_blank"}
    - Questions:
        - Do these decisions improve the lives of Canadians or made them more difficult? 
        - Where do administrative decisions derive their legitimacy in the public eye?
        - What limits the scope of administrative decision-makers?

The rule of law protects individuals from the arbitrary exercise of public power and, at a minimum, the rule of law means:

- that administrative decision-makers are **bound by law**; and
- that those who are subject to an administrative decision have some means of **legal recourse** to ensure that the decision complied with the law.


The Constitution is the supreme law of Canada and the **rule of law** is explicitly recognized in the preamble of the *Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms*, which is found in the *Constitution Act*, 1982:

<p class="highlight blue">Whereas Canada is founded upon principles that recognize the supremacy of God and the rule of law.</p>


Rule of law doesn’t necessarily mean that courts (or tribunals) are supreme over all legal issues.  In Canada, we have an independent Parliament, that is “sovereign” over all other government institutions, including executive and judicial bodies.  This is the concept of **parliamentary sovereignty**.  

So remember that the rule of law, when seen through this lens of parliamentary sovereignty, allows for Parliament to assign at least some legal questions to bodies other than the courts.

In general, adherence to the rule of law particularly in the field of administrative law helps to protect Canadians from abuses of state power. In this way, the rule of law helps to secure Canadians’ legal rights, and protection from arbitrary decision-making. 


## 2.2 Politics and Law

!!! note "Read"

    *British Columbia v. Imperial Tobacco Canada Ltd.*, [2005 SCC 49](https://canlii.ca/t/1lpk1){:target=" \_blank"}

    - One of the tobacco manufacturers’ main arguments, is that the rules in the *Tobacco Damages and Health Care Costs Recovery Act* are so illogical and unfair that they violate basic **principles of the rule of law**.They also argued that the law violated the unwritten constitutional principle of **judicial independence**.  
    - The Court dismisses these arguments, saying that these very rules reflect “legitimate policy concerns” of the Government of British Columbia.  
    - In addition, the Court held that this was not even a relevant question since the Act did not interfere with judicial independence.

The relationship between democratic principles and the rule of law doesn’t mean that the principle is *synonymous* with democratic principles such as equality and human rights.

Basically, the Court’s rejection of the appellants’ argument represented the apex of what is known as a “**textual approach**” to using the actual text of the Constitution as an alternative to considering an argument based a specific standard of rights.  


<p class="highlight blue">[59] - [60] “..it is difficult to conceive now the rule of law could be used as a basis for invalidating legislation such as the Act based on its content. This is because none of the principles that the rule of law embraces speak directly to the terms of the legislation ... ‘unwritten constitutional principles’, including the rule of law, ‘are capable of limiting government actions’... but the government actions constrained by the rule of law ... is, by definitions, usually that of the executive and judicial branches. Actions of the legislative branch are constrained too, but only in the sense that they must comply with legislated requirements as to manner and form.”</p>

In particular the Court went to lengths to stress that an unwritten principle such as the rule of law **cannot supplant** the actual text of the Constitution. 


<p class="highlight blue" markdown="1">the appellants’ arguments fail to recognize that in a constitutional democracy such as ours, protection from legislation that some might view as unjust or unfair properly lie not in the amorphous underlying principled of our Constitution, but in **its text and the ballot box**...”</p>

Because of this ruling, Canada is the first country outside the United States where governments can sue tobacco manufacturers to recover billions of dollars in smoking-related health costs.

!!! note "Practice Quiz"

    1. Which one of these is **NOT** one of the “three characteristics” of judicial independence (mentioned in Imperial Tobacco)?
          - [x] Judicial activism 
          - [ ] Security of tenure 
          - [ ] Administrative independence 
          - [ ] Financial security 

    2. According to Major J., what is the primary role of the judiciary in Canada?
          - [ ] Courts interpret the law, legislature applies it. 
          - [ ] Courts must not interpret the law, merely apply it.
          - [ ] Courts interpret the law, the executive applies it. 
          - [x] Courts interpret and apply the law. 

    3. The Court noted that many of the tobacco manufacturers’ arguments about the rule of law were simply broader versions of which Charter right?
          - [ ] Right to life, liberty and security of the person 
          - [x] Right to a fair and public hearing 
          - [ ] Right to freedom of expression 
          - [ ] Right to equal treatment before and under the law 

## 2.3 Privative Clauses & Expertise

!!! note "Reading"

    Text pp 309-311 (II); 92-93


Legislatures frequently list matters that are within a tribunal's jurisdiction and where the tribunal's determination of issues is **final**.  A privative clause historically stated that decisions of a tribunal are final and **not subject to any appeal process**. However, more recently in Canada privative clauses are written to prevent not only appeals but to prevent any **judicial review** process.

This known as a “**full**” privative clause.  Courts will generally give a fair amount of **deference** to a tribunal subject to a full privative clause.

However, there are limits on legislative power to limit judicial review.  The Supreme Court has said that even the most clearly stated and expressed privative clauses cannot stop courts from reviewing administrative decisions for their constitutionality. 

Privative clauses also do not prevent reviews based on **jurisdiction**.

Courts may defer to administrative bodies, based on the tribunal’s relative **expertise** and subject matter, in cases where there is a privative clause. The level of expertise that a tribunal can demonstrate will be **proportionate to the level of deference** a reviewing court allows. 


!!! note ""

    Deference and degree of deference Courts show to administrative decisions:

    - **Reasonableness** is the more deferential standard that a court can give to an administrative decision-maker based on expertise of the decision-maker. 
    - **Correctness** is the less deferential standard that a court can give to an administrative decision-maker. 


## 2.4 A Legal Constraint: Unwritten Principle

!!! note "Case Readings"

    *Roncarelli v. Duplessis*, [1959 CanLII 50](https://canlii.ca/t/22wmw){:target=" \_blank"}

    - Both Mr. Roncarelli’s actions and the Premier’s decision took place in Québec during a time where there was large tension between the dominant Roman Catholic Church and other religious groups. 
    - The Duplessis government was seen as particularly autocratic and hostile towards Jehovah’s Witnesses.
    - The complainant, Mr. Roncarelli, was a successful restaurant owner in Quebec and a very active member of the Jehovah’s Witness community.
    - Roncarelli often helped Jehovah’s Witnesses who were arrested by posting their bail so that they could continue their lives outside of prison while awaiting trial, doing so more than 350 times in a three-year period. 
    - Catholic politicians and public officials were unhappy with Roncarelli’s actions. As a result, the chief prosecutor informed Premier Duplessis.
    - Duplessis on his own initiative contacted the Québec Liquor Commission and had Mr. Roncarelli’s liquor license revoked. As a result, Mr. Roncarelli lost earnings eventually caused him to sell his business. When he discovered why he had lost his liquor licence, Mr. Roncarelli initiated litigation against Mr. Duplessis for damages. 


pp 140 & 142:

<p class="highlight blue" markdown="1">In public regulation of this sort there is no such thing as absolute and untrammelled "discretion", that is that action can be taken on any ground or for any reason that can be suggested to the mind of the administrator; no legislative Act can, without express language, be taken to contemplate an unlimited arbitrary power exercisable for any purpose, however capricious or irrelevant, regardless of the nature or purpose of the statute.</p>

> Roncarelli was a particularly egregious case, where Premier Duplessis’s own forthright statements contributed largely to the finding of malice and bad faith in his conduct. Other cases alleging malice or bad faith in decisions, where authorities are more circumspect in their actions and statements, make it much harder to prove liability. 

The Supreme Court ruled that Premier Duplessis wrongfully caused Mr. Roncarelli’s liquor license to be revoked and that in doing so he exceeded his jurisdiction as Premier and executive leader in Quebec. The Court ruled that he was not entitled to any immunity and even as Premier is not above the law. 


## 2.5 Deference as Respect

!!! note "Case Readings"

    *National Corn Growers Assn. v. Canada (Import tribunal)*, [1990 CanLII 49](https://canlii.ca/t/1fsrz){:target=" \_blank"}


