---
layout: post
title: L509 Unit 7
date: 2025-11-11
draft: false
categories:
  - Law
tags:
  - Administrative Law
  - LAW_V 509 99A 2025W1
  - Unit 7
---

# Standard of Review.

## 7.0 Overview

The landmark case in the choice and application of the standard of review in Canada is the 2019 decision of ***Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) v. Vavilov***, [2019 SCC 65](https://canlii.ca/t/j46kb){:target=" \_blank"}.

A very quick and brief reminder on the two current standards of reviewing an administrative decision:

- **Reasonableness**: is the **more deferential** standard that a court can give to an administrative decision-maker based on expertise of the decision-maker. A decision must be shown to be “unreasonable” in the sense that no reasons are given in analysis to reasonably support the conclusion.  Following the ***Vavilov*** decision it is clearly the presumptive (i.e. “default”) standard of reviewing administrative decisions, including ones that involve **jurisdictional questions of a administrative decision-maker exceeding their statutory authority**.
- **Correctness**: is the **less deferential** standard that a court can give to an administrative decision-maker. The court will generally give no deference at all to the decision-maker, will base its ruling on application of law, and can substitute its own opinion for the administrative decision-maker.  Correctness review applies in certain statutorily directed situations and other exceptional situations outlined in ***Vavilov***.

## 7.1 A Short History of Standard of Review

!!! note "Readings"

    - Textbook, pp 307-314

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">**Module Content**</p>

In 1979, the SCC in ***C.U.P.E. v. N.B. Liquor Corporation***, [1979 CanLII 23 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1mm2x){:target=" \_blank"} charted a new course that encouraged courts to defer to administrative decision-makers who provided reasonable answers to legal questions within their mandates.

Generally, the basic starting point for the standard of review of an administrative process is that it does NOT involve a total reassessment of the merits of a decision. There are some exceptions to reasonableness review, now outlined in ***Vavilov***, that will attract correctness review.   

As we will see in the 2019 ***Vavilvov*** decision, the SCC relegated **jurisdictional questions** (other than overlapping jurisdiction) to **reasonableness** review.  However, the “language of jurisdiction” lives on and understanding the concept of jurisdiction is still fundamentally important to provide context for a deeper study into applicable standards of review in Canadian administrative law. 

The "Blockbuster" case: ***CUPE***

***CUPE*** dealt with many issues, including statutory interpretation and the extent of deference to be shown to administrative tribunals in areas of their expertise.

The case is summarized in text. Read the case as a good historical explanation of theory and principle and **less for its current precedential value**.

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">Textbook Summary</p>

In administrative law doctrine, the standard of review inquiry proceeds in two steps. First, should the court defer? Second, if the answer is yes, how does the court defer.

The **jurisprudence has been volatile**, and the Supreme Court of Canada has hit the “reset” button several times. It did so in 1979 (***CUPE***), 1998 (***Pushpanathan v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)***, [1998 CanLII 778 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fqs6){:target=" \_blank"}), and again in 2008 (***Dunsmuir v. New Brunswick***, [2008 SCC 9](https://canlii.ca/t/1vxsm){:target=" \_blank"}) before the latest revision in ***Vavilov*** (2019).

Judicial review is ordinarily available for breaches of procedural fairness, errors of law, abuse of discretion, or factual findings made in the absence of evidence. 

So-called **privative clauses** were originally intended to prevent courts from interfering with substantive outcomes of administrative action through the doctrines of error of law or absence of evidence for findings of fact. Privative clauses vary in wording but usually include **a grant of exclusive jurisdiction** over the subject matter, **a declaration of finality** with respect to the outcome, and **a prohibition on any court proceedings** to set the outcome aside.

On the one hand, the common law presumes that citizens retain access to the ordinary courts in order to ensure that creatures of statute do not exceed or abuse the power granted to them. The Supreme Court of Canada even elevated judicial review to a constitutionally protected principle under s 96 of the *Constitution Act*, 1867.

On the other hand, the doctrine of parliamentary supremacy dictates that the legislator enacts the law, and the court must interpret and apply the law in accordance with the legislator’s intent.

the House of Lords’ ***Anisminic Ltd v Foreign Compensation Commission***, [1969] 2 AC 147 (HL) case: decision-makers’ jurisdiction (authority to act) is demarcated by statute. 

Judges faced with a privative clause assigned themselves the task of determining whether the issue fell “within jurisdiction” and was thereby insulated from judicial review, **OR** was a “jurisdictional question” that determined the outer boundary of the decision-maker’s authority. 

In a case of the **latter**, a court was entitled to review the decision as if **no privative clause existed**.

The most enduring effect of this jurisprudence was the persistence of the concept of a “jurisdictional question,” long after standard of review doctrine evolved to a point where **a “jurisdictional question” was no longer required to justify judicial review** in the face of a privative clause.

***CUPE V NEW BRUNSWICK LIQUOR CORPORATION***

The shorthand description of ***CUPE***’s outcome is that a jurisdictional question is assessed according to a standard of “**correctness**,” while questions within jurisdiction are evaluated against a standard of “**patent unreasonableness**.”

The Court’s judgment in ***CUPE*** did not make a clean break with earlier jurisprudence that invoked jurisdictional error to circumvent privative clauses. It conveyed a spirit of curial deference, a recognition that administrative decision-makers are not merely “inferior tribunals” but specialized bodies that possess a legislative mandate to apply their expertise and experience to matters that they may be better suited to address than an “ordinary court.” 

Consequently, a court should only intervene (by labelling as jurisdictional error) where an interpretation of the provision is “so patently unreasonable that its construction cannot be rationally supported by the relevant legislation.”

A reading of ***CUPE*** reveals three sources of the Supreme Court of Canada’s doctrinal change. 

- First, ... according to Dickson J, courts should recognize that these specialized decision-makers bear primary responsibility for implementing their statutory mandate and may bring valuable expertise and experience to the task that a generalist judge lacks. 
- Second, no single interpretation could lay claim to being “correct.” Instead, there were several plausible interpretations.
- Finally, Dickson J acknowledges the failure of prior judicial efforts to construct a coherent, principled means of distinguishing reviewable questions from those insulated by a privative clause.

## 7.2 Concept of Curial Deference

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">**Module Content**</p>

!!! info "Curial Deference"

    - ***B.C. (Health sciences Assn. of) v. British Columbia (Industrial Relations Council)***, [1992 CanLII 373 (BC CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/1d9fb){:target=" \_blank"} at paras 33-34
        - The term “**Curial deference**” is a way of expressing the notion that when the Legislature sets up a specialized tribunal, invests it with broad powers and incorporates a privative clause into the enabling statute, it is telling the courts that it intends the tribunal to have the right, because it understands the subject-matter better than do judges, to make decisions which the judges might think to be wrong decisions.
        - To put it another way, where, by the terms of its legislation, the Legislature requires **curial deference**, the courts are bound, where no constitutional question arises, to obey the Legislature and not subvert its intention.
    - ***Vavilov***, at para 286
        - **Curial deference**, after all, is the hallmark of **reasonableness review**, setting it apart from the substitution of opinion permitted under the correctness standard.

You should note that there are many past SCC decisions that recognize that privative clauses were relevant indicators of legislative intent and attracted increase judicial deference to an administrative decision-maker.  **This is something that may have changed with the SCC’s “recalibration” of standard of review in *Vavilov*.**  

In the ***Vavilov*** framework, privative clauses by themselves do not seem particularly relevant in choosing a standard of review.  Absent a clear statutory avenue of appeal or other statutory language, or the presence of one of the exceptions outlined in ***Vavilov***, **a presumption of reasonableness review will now apply** whether or not there is a privative clause in an administrative decision-maker’s home statute.

## 7.3 Pragmatic and Functional Analysis

!!! note "Readings"

    - Textbook, pp 314-319

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">**Module Content**</p>

The SCC’s historical definition of P&FA was reformulated in ***Pushpanathan***.  The question to be answered became a contextual one:

> “Did the legislator intend this question to attract judicial deference?” 

The factors to be analyzed included privative clause, tribunal expertise, act’s purpose and the nature of the problem in issue.  In terms of applying the PF&A approach, ***Pushpanathan*** is now sidelined by the landmark ***Vavilov*** decision in 2019.

When reading the  text readings, consider the 4 elements from ***Pushpanathan*** test (**Privative Clause**, **Expertise**, **General Statutory Purpose & Specific Purpose of. Provision**, & **Nature of the Problem**) and how they have changed in subsequent SCC decisions.

As you will see in the next topics, the effects of the landmark SCC decisions in ***Dunsmuir*** and ***Vavilov*** altered the consideration of these contextual factors.  

***Vavilov*** in particular criticized the PF&A's contextual analysis as "unwieldly" offering "limited practical guidance for courts attempting to assess an administrative decision maker’s relative expertise. "  (***Vavilov***, para 27).  

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">Textbook Summary</p>

**FROM CUPE TO PUSHPANATHAN**

In terms of the **rule-of-law tension** between fidelity to legislative intent and the common law presumption of **access to the ordinary courts**, the Court’s expansive interpretation of s 96 of the *Constitution Act*, 1867 ensures that the latter trumps the former.

<p class="highlight blue" markdown="1">Section 96 grants jurisdiction over the appointment of superior court judges to the federal government but has been interpreted to protect “essential” judicial functions associated with superior court judges.</p>

## Discussion 7.3 Historical Standard of Review 1

#### Question

Summarize how the Standard of Review for questions within an ADM's jurisdiction changed over time from the ***CUPE***, ***Southam*** and ***Pushpanathan*** decisions.  

#### Samantha's Comment

The standard of review refers to the level of deference that a reviewing court gives to an administrative decision maker's (ADM) decision. The standard of review can have a significant impact on the outcome of a judicial review.

In the ***CUPE*** decision, the Supreme Court of Canada (SCC) established the "pragmatic and functional approach," which requires the court to consider several factors, including the expertise of the ADM and the nature of the question being decided, in determining the appropriate standard of review. This approach gives a **high level of deference to ADMs**, as long as their decisions are within their jurisdiction and are reasonable.

In the ***Southam*** decision, the SCC clarified that the standard of review analysis should be conducted on a question-by-question basis, rather than on the decision as a whole. This means that **different questions within a decision may be subject to different standards of review**.

In ***Pushpanathan***, the SCC further refined the standard of review analysis by establishing two categories of questions: 

- (1) "**jurisdictional**" questions, which determine whether the ADM has the authority to make a particular decision, and 
- (2) "**non-jurisdictional**" questions, which concern the substance of the decision. 

The SCC held that jurisdictional questions should be reviewed on a standard of correctness, while non-jurisdictional questions should be reviewed on a standard of reasonableness.

Overall, these decisions have resulted in a more nuanced and contextual approach to the standard of review, which seeks to balance the need for deference to ADMs with the need for effective judicial oversight.

#### Answer

Omitted.

## 7.4 *Dunsmuir*: New Approach & 2 Standards

!!! note "Readings"

    - Textbook, pp 319-324

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">**Module Content**</p>

Despite the Supreme Court’s promises in the ruling, ***Dunsmuir*** generated as much controversy and confusion as it did clarity.

Given the SCC’s recent re-examination of ***Dunsmuir***'s legacy in ***Vavilov*** we will focus on a brief introduction to the ***Dunsmuir*** case and the text’s analysis.  What the case DID do to simplify matters was to reduce the standards of review to two approaches: **correctness** and **reasonableness**, and eliminate patent unreasonableness.

Pay particular attention to the ***Dunsmuir*** principles and less to any framework for review, since the decision was never successful in outlining a clear framework in the way that ***Vavilov*** clearly aspires to do.  

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">Textbook Summary</p>

***DUNSMUIR*: AND THEN THERE WERE TWO**

**Deference** is the default starting point, ... applied in the presence of a privative clause, ordinary judicial review, and in virtually all cases where there was a statutory appeal.

The ***Dunsmuir*** majority identified four (non-exhaustive) categories where the appropriate standard of review was correctness: 

- a question of law “of central importance to the legal system as a whole and outside the adjudicator’s specialized area of expertise”;
- constitutional questions; 
- “true” questions of jurisdiction: “where the tribunal must explicitly determine whether its statutory grant of power gives it the authority to decide a particular matter”;
- “questions regarding the jurisdictional lines between two or more competing specialized tribunals.”

***Dunsmuir*** also signalled a shift in the role of expertise from a question to be answered to a default presumption. The Supreme Court of Canada came close to affirming deference as a **birthright**
in the following passage from ***Edmonton (City) v. Edmonton East (Capilano) Shopping Centres Ltd.***, [2016 SCC 47](https://canlii.ca/t/gvjqr){:target=" \_blank"}:

> Expertise arises from the specialization of functions of administrative tribunals like the Board which have a habitual familiarity with the legislative scheme they administer ... . Expertise may also arise where legislation requires that members of a given tribunal possess certain qualifications. However, as with judges, expertise is not a matter of the qualifications or experience of any particular tribunal member. Rather, **expertise is something that inheres in a tribunal itself as an institution**.

One motive for adopting a correctness standard on certain questions of law is to promote consistency. [However], the Court rejected the assertion that the precedential value of resolving inconsistency within or between tribunals constituted an independent basis for adopting a correctness standard of review, where deference would otherwise be warranted. How and when a court should address conflicting tribunal jurisprudence remained **a vexing and controversial issue** among courts, administrative bodies, commentators, and affected parties.

## Discussion 7.4: Historical Standard of Review 2

### Question

Summarize how the Standard of Review for questions within an ADM's jurisdiction changed after the ***Pushpanathan*** decision, with the release of ***Dunsmuir***. 

### Samantha's Comment

The goal of ***Dunsmuir*** was to simplify and clarify the standard of review analysis and promote consistency in its application. The Court recognized that the previous approach, which included multiple standards of review, had led to confusion and unpredictability in administrative law. By reducing the number of deference standards and providing clear guidance on when to apply each standard, the Court sought to achieve greater coherence in administrative law and promote the values of certainty, predictability, and consistency.

### Answer

Before ***Dunsmuir***, courts had a complex system for reviewing administrative decisions, using three standards, **correctness**, **reasonableness simpliciter**, and **patent unreasonableness** when deciding which to apply based on factors like the tribunal’s expertise and the statutory context. Some questions labeled as “jurisdictional” were automatically reviewed for correctness, while others within the tribunal’s authority received varying levels of deference.

The ***Dunsmuir*** decision simplified this framework by reducing the standards of review to just two: **correctness** and **reasonableness**. Decisions made within a tribunal’s jurisdiction are generally reviewed for reasonableness, with correctness reserved only for exceptional cases, such as constitutional questions, true jurisdictional questions, legal questions of fundamental importance outside the tribunal’s expertise, or disputes over boundaries between tribunals.


## 7.5 The 2019 Trilogy & New Standard of Review Rules

!!! note "Reading"

    - Textbook, pp 328-339
    - ***Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) v. Vavilov***, [2019 SCC 65](https://canlii.ca/t/j46kb){:target=" \_blank"}
        - For this topic you do not need to read the entire decisions.  Please read the headnotes for these cases for this topic. 
    - ***Bell Canada v. Canada (Attorney General)***, [2019 SCC 66](https://canlii.ca/t/j46k8){:target=" \_blank"}
        - For this topic you do not need to read the entire decisions.  Please read the headnotes for these cases for this topic. 
    - Steven Mason, et al., “[*The Supreme Court of Canada simplifies the standard of review analysis in historic Super Bowl trilogy*](https://www.mccarthy.ca/en/insights/articles/touchdown-supreme-court-canada-simplifies-standard-review-analysis-historic-super-bowl-trilogy){:target=" \_blank"}”, McCarthy Tetrault
    - Dale Smith, “[*Presumption of reasonableness: The Supreme Court clarifies the standard of review*](https://www.nationalmagazine.ca/en-ca/articles/law/rule-of-law/2019/presumption-of-reasonableness){:target=" \_blank"}”, Canadian Bar Association

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">**Module Content**</p>

In 2018, the Supreme Court of Canada granted leave to appeal in three cases, ***Vavilov***, ***Bell Canada*** & ***NFL Football***, and asked specifically to be briefed on the standard of review of administrative action:

> The Court is of the view that these appeals provide an opportunity to consider the nature and scope of judicial review of administrative action, as addressed in ***Dunsmuir v. New Brunswick***, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 190, 2008 SCC 9, and subsequent cases. To that end, the appellants and respondent are invited to devote a substantial part of their written and oral submissions on the appeal to the question of standard of review...

***Vavilov*** was the main decision where the Court outlined its new framework.  ***Vavilov*** represents a comprehensive attempt to address two main issues that plagued Canadian courts dealing with reviewing administrative decisions:  

- choice of standard of review, and 
- how to apply reasonableness review.  

At its core it is an ambitious attempt to simplify the confusing state of affairs in these areas. 

**Correctness Review:**

  - The correctness standard of review is composed of an analysis of whether an administrative decision-maker’s decision was correct as a question of law. 
  - It is the **less deferential standard** that a court can give to an administrative decision-maker. The court will generally give no deference at all to the decision-maker, will base its ruling on application of law, and can substitute its own opinion. 

**Application of the Framework & Correctness review:  ==Post-*Vavilov*==**

The majority decision’s analysis very tight, concise and straightforward.  You only need to look at paragraph 34 of ***Bell Canada*** to summarize the court’s analysis here:

> ***Bell*** and the ***NFL*** challenge the Final Decision and the Final Order by means of the statutory appeal mechanism provided for in s.31(2)of the *Broadcasting Act*, which allows for an appeal to be brought to the Federal Court of Appeal, with leave, “on a question of law or a question of jurisdiction”. The appellate standards of review therefore apply (the Majority in ***Bell***, quoting ***Vavilov*** at paras.36-52).

As the question of whether the CRTC had the authority to target a specific programme in its order “plainly” fell “within the scope of the statutory appeal mechanism”, the standard of review was **correctness**.

!!! info "Headnote of *Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) v. Vavilov*, [2019 SCC 65](https://canlii.ca/t/j46kb){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - More generally, this appeal and its companion cases (***Bell Canada v. Canada (Attorney General)***, 2019 SCC 66) provide an opportunity to consider and clarify the **law applicable to the judicial review** of administrative decisions as addressed in ***Dunsmuir v. New Brunswick***, 2008 SCC 9, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 190, and subsequent cases. 
    - The submissions presented to the Court have highlighted two aspects of the **current framework which need clarification**. 
        - The first aspect is the analysis for determining the **standard of review**. 
        - The second aspect is the need for better guidance from this Court on the **proper application of the reasonableness standard**.
    - In setting out **a revised framework**, this decision **departs from the Court’s existing jurisprudence** on standard of review in certain respects. 
    - The revised standard of review analysis **begins with a presumption that reasonableness is the applicable standard in all cases**. ... it is no longer necessary for courts to engage in a contextual inquiry in order to identify the appropriate standard.
    - The **presumption** of reasonableness review can be **rebutted** in two types of situations. 
        - The first is where the **legislature** has indicated that it intends a different standard to apply. This will be the case where it has explicitly prescribed the applicable standard of review. 
        - The second situation in which the presumption of reasonableness review will be rebutted is where the **rule of law** requires that the standard of correctness be applied. This will be the case for certain categories of legal questions, namely constitutional questions, general questions of law of central importance to the legal system as a whole and questions related to the jurisdictional boundaries between two or more administrative bodies. 
    - The possibility that another category could be recognized as requiring a **derogation from the presumption of reasonableness** review in a future case is **not definitively foreclosed**. However, any new basis for correctness review would be exceptional and would need to be consistent with this framework and the overarching principles set out in this decision. 
    - There is **also a need for better guidance from the Court on the proper application of the reasonableness standard**, what that standard entails and how it should be applied in practice. 
    - Reasonableness ... Its starting point lies in the principle of judicial restraint and in demonstrating respect for the distinct role of administrative decision makers. In conducting reasonableness review, **a court must** consider the outcome of the administrative decision in light of its underlying rationale, to ensure that the decision as a whole is **transparent**, **intelligible** and **justified**. Judicial review is concerned with both the outcome of the decision and the reasoning process that led to that outcome.
    - In cases **where reasons are required**, they are the starting point for reasonableness review, as they are the primary mechanism by which decision makers show that their decisions are reasonable. 
    - In many cases, formal **reasons for a decision will not be given or required**. Even without reasons, it is possible for the record and the context to reveal that a decision was made on the basis of an improper motive or for another impermissible reason. There will nonetheless be situations in which neither the record nor the larger context sheds light on the basis for the decision. In such cases, the reviewing court must still examine the decision in light of the relevant factual and legal constraints on the decision maker in order to determine whether the decision is reasonable.
    - It is conceptually useful to consider two types of fundamental flaws that tend to render a decision unreasonable.
        - To be reasonable, a decision must be based on an **internally coherent reasoning** that is both **rational** and **logical**. A failure in this respect may lead a reviewing court to conclude that a decision must be set aside. Because formal reasons should be read in light of the record and with due sensitivity to the administrative regime in which they were given, a decision will be unreasonable if the reasons for it, read holistically, fail to reveal a rational chain of analysis or if they reveal that the decision was based on an irrational chain of analysis. 
        - The second type of fundamental flaw arises when a decision is in some respect **untenable** in light of the relevant factual and legal constraints that bear on it. 
            - Because administrative decision makers receive their powers by statute, the governing statutory scheme is likely to be the most salient aspect of the legal context relevant to a particular decision. 
            - the decision maker must take the evidentiary record and the general factual matrix that bears on its decision into account, and its decision must be reasonable in light of them. 
    - individuals are entitled to greater **procedural protection** when the decision in question involves the potential for significant personal impact or harm. Where the impact of a decision on an individual’s rights and interests is severe, the reasons provided to that individual must **reflect the stakes**.

!!! info "Headnote of *Bell Canada v. Canada (Attorney General)*, [2019 SCC 66](https://canlii.ca/t/j46k8){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - Given that the CRTC’s Order and Decision have been challenged by way of the **statutory appeal mechanism** provided for in s. 31(2) of the *Broadcasting Act*, which allows for an appeal to be brought to the Federal Court of Appeal, with leave, on a question of law or a question of jurisdiction, the **appellate standards of review** apply in this case. ... the applicable standard is **correctness**.

!!! info "The Supreme Court of Canada simplifies the standard of review analysis in historic Super Bowl trilogy, December 20, 2019"

    - All three appeals, ***Bell Canada***, ***National Football League***, and ***Vavilov***, were heard together at the Supreme Court of Canada in December 2018. In giving judgment more than a year later, a majority of the Court used ***Vavilov*** to articulate a new approach to determining the applicable standard of review. 
    - **Determining the standard of review**
    - The majority held that all administrative decisions should **presumptively be reviewed on the reasonableness standard**, **unless** either legislative intent or the rule of law requires otherwise. Specifically, according to the majority, the court should accord deference to the administrative decision **unless**:
        - the **legislature** has indicated that it intends a different standard of review to apply, either:
            - by explicitly prescribing the applicable standard of review; or
            - by providing that the administrative decision may be appealed to a court; or
        - the **rule of law** requires that the correctness standard be applied, because the administrative decision raises
            - a constitutional question;
            - a general question of law of central importance to the legal system as a whole; or
            - a question related to the jurisdictional boundaries between two or more administrative bodies.
    - Notably, the majority in ***Vavilov*** **eliminated** two circumstances in which courts could previously (if only arguably) rebut the presumption of deference: 
        - where the administrative decision raised a “true question of jurisdiction”, and 
        - where a “contextual inquiry” indicated that the legislature intended the correctness standard to be applied. 
    - The majority also **eliminated** the expertise of the administrative decision-maker as a consideration in determining the applicable standard of review; expertise is now solely relevant to the reasonableness analysis.
    - **Applying the reasonableness standard**
    - Most significantly, the majority held that a reviewing court must primarily consider the **reasons** that an administrative decision-maker offered for its decision, rather than merely the **conclusion** that it reached. As the majority stressed:
        - It is not enough for the outcome of a decision to be justifiable. Where reasons for a decision are required, the decision must also be justified, by way of those reasons, by the decision-maker to those to whom the decision applies. While some outcomes may be so at odds with the legal and factual context that they could never be supported by intelligible and rational reasoning, an otherwise reasonable outcome also cannot stand if it was reached on an improper basis.
    - The majority held that, even when procedural fairness does not require the administrative decision-maker to provide reasons, the reviewing court must nonetheless examine the reasoning process underlying the decision. **Only in rare cases in which no reasons are provided and neither the record nor the larger context sheds light on the basis for the decision should the reasonableness analysis focus on the outcome.**
    - According to the majority, a reasonable decision is one that is **based on internally coherent reasoning** and that is **justified in light of the legal and factual constraints that bear on it**. The majority explains this latter qualification in a manner that is reminiscent of the approach to determining the appropriate degree of procedural fairness required in a particular administrative context, as set out in the Supreme Court of Canada’s 1999 decision in ***Baker v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)***. 


#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">Textbook Summary</p>

The decision in ***Vavilov*** was the “big bang” of Canadian administrative law: from now on, every issue must be analyzed with ***Vavilov*** as the starting point, with prior jurisprudence playing a supporting role only to the extent it can fit within the ***Vavilov*** framework.

**APPLYING THE REASONABLENESS STANDARD**

On the key propositions underpinning the methodology of reasonableness review, all nine judges were in fact *ad idem*: 

- reasonableness review is robust; 
- reasons are fundamental to the legitimacy of administrative decision-making; 
- unreasonableness must be demonstrated by the applicant;
- reasonableness review should begin with the reasons given by the administrative decision-maker; 
- reasonableness review is contextual; and 
- reasonableness review should be conducted with a healthy appreciation that “‘[a]dministrative justice’ will not always look like ‘judicial justice.’” 

In addition, the majority insisted that where reasons are defective, a reviewing court is not “to fashion its own reasons in order to buttress the administrative decision."

The majority went on, at some length, “to consider **two types of fundamental flaws**”:

**First**, the absence of “reasoning that is both rational and logical,” such as reasons that “fail to reveal a rational chain of analysis,” ones that “read in conjunction with the record do not make it possible to understand the decision maker’s reasoning on a critical point,” or ones that “exhibit clear logical fallacies, such as circular reasoning, false dilemmas, unfounded generalizations or an absurd premise.”

**Second**, a decision must be “justified in relation to the constellation of law and facts that are relevant to the decision."

The methodology of ***Vavilov*** reasonableness review is inherently **deferential**.

Thus ***Vavilov*** teaches that judicial review should be neither a line-by-line treasure hunt for error nor an effort to redo the work of the administrative decision-maker in order to somehow save the decision.Reasons for administrative decisions should be read **fairly**, with due attention to the decision-making **context** and the **arguments** made before the decision-maker.

Despite the strong call to imprint reasonableness review with the imprimatur of deference, it is nonetheless arguable that ***Vavilov*** has set a slightly **higher bar for decision-makers**.

- First, the decision must be justified in light of the legal and factual constraints on the decision-maker.
- Second, the decision must be the product of the demonstrated expertise of the decision-maker.
- Third, the decision must be responsive to the central points raised before the decision-maker, who must, indeed, grapple with key arguments and evidence.
- Fourth, there is now a strong requirement of **contemporaneity** . Reviewing courts are, consistent with the majority reasons in ***Vavilov***, to refrain from bolstering defective administrative decisions with post hoc reasoning supplied by the decision-maker in an affidavit, clever counsel at the lectern, or by the reviewing court itself.

A number of the specific factual and legal constraints laid out in ***Vavilov*** deserve closer analysis.

- Through its emphasis on reasons-first judicial review, ***Vavilov*** makes clear that a reviewing court is not to conduct its own **statutory interpretation** exercise to establish a benchmark or yardstick against which to measure an administrative decision-maker’s interpretation of law.
- A decision-maker must comply with the “rationale and purview of the statutory scheme”; a decision “must comport with any more specific constraints imposed by the governing legislative scheme, such as the statutory definitions, principles or formulas that prescribe the exercise of a discretion”; and a decision-maker should not fetter a discretionary power.
- The majority in ***Vavilov*** confirmed, in clear terms, what many of us had supposed to be the case, namely that** departures from previous administrative decisions** have to be justified.
- Where a decision “has particularly harsh consequences for the affected individual, the decision maker must explain why its decision best reflects the legislature’s intention.” In concrete terms, a decision-maker whose decision will have harsh consequences has “**a heightened responsibility**” to justify that decision.

##  Discussion 7.5: ***Vavilov***

### Questions

There is such wide scope for discussion following Vavilov but at its core the decision addresses two fundamental issues:  

- choice of standard of review; and 
- application of the reasonableness standard.  

***Vavilov*** was a “unanimous” decision in that all of the Court agreed on the result.  However, if you read the “concurring reasons” (minority opinion) of **Abella** and **Karakatsanis** JJ. you will see they resemble more of a “dissent” on how the court approached two fundamental issues. 

This is an open discussion forum where you discuss many aspects of ***Vavilov***, in particular some of the questions raised by the minority opinion starting at paragraph 198. Which opinion do you agree with?  What aspects of Vavilov do you agree with and which ones are more problematic?  

### Samantha's Comment

**Statutory Appeals vs. Judicial Review**

Sometimes the governing statute itself has an appeal process built right into it.  It might state that all decisions can be appealed to the courts, or only certain types of decisions.  This is what is referred to as **Statutory Appeal**.  It is an appeal to the courts that is specifically included in the statute.

A right to challenge administrative decision-making or action provided for specifically by statute and, most commonly, described as an appeal and found in the very statute which is the source of decision or action. 

Statutory appeals stand in contrast to **judicial review which has common law origins** and now is generally provided for by a general judicial review statute or rules of court. 

Other times, the statute doesn't say anything about appeals.  In these cases, the decision can still go to the courts but these hearings are called Judicial Reviews.  

So whether it is called a Statutory Appeal or a Judicial Review depends on **whether the statute allowed** the decision to go up to the courts.

In ***Vavilov*** we have the court pronouncing that **reasonableness will now be the presumptive standard of review**.  The exceptions are:

- When the legislation explicit states that another standard will apply.  **When a case goes to statutory appeal, and a standard of review is set out, the court will apply that standard**.
- If the legislation sets out a statutory appeal mechanism, but a standard of review is **not** set out, the standard of review is as set out in ***Housen v. Nikolaisen***, [2002 SCC 33](https://canlii.ca/t/51tl){:target=" \_blank"}.  
    - A pure question of **law** is reviewed on a **correctness** standard.  
    - For questions of **fact** the standard of review is “**palpable and overriding error**.”  
    - Questions of **mixed law and fact** are reviewed on correctness standard if there is an “extricable” legal question or issue of principle, otherwise they are reviewed for palpable and overriding error. 

The **correctness** standard may still be applied where the **rule of law** requires it.  This will include constitutional questions, general questions of law that are of central importance to the legal system as a whole, and questions relating to the jurisdictional boundaries between two or more administrative bodies.

On an application for judicial review (where there is nothing in the statute about appeals) the ***Vavilov*** reasonableness framework applies.


## 7.6 Selection of the Standard of Review

!!! note "Readings"

    - Textbook, pp 339-351

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">**Module Content**</p>

The first question that ***Vavilov*** asks, at paragraphs 34-35 of the decision:  **Is there a legislated standard of review?** 

Basically the decision here references two types of standards that can be legislated:

- **Explicit standard of review** outlined in legislation
    
    For an example, see British Columbia’s *Administrative Tribunals Act*, S.B.C. 2004, c. 45, ss. 58-59. If there is an explicit standard of review outlined in legislation, the Court should simply follow the legislation.

- **A legislated “appeal” process**, with or without leave

    This is a significant change from past review practice.  Beginning at paragraph 37 of ***Vavilov***, the decision explains that in cases where a legislature provides for a statutory right of appeal to the courts AND the legislature has not outlined an applicable standard of review, the standard of review is now determined in accordance with **the principles of appellate review** set out in ***Housen v. Nikolaisen***, [2002 SCC 33](https://canlii.ca/t/51tl){:target=" \_blank"}.  **A pure question of law is reviewed on a correctness standard.  For questions of fact the standard of review is “palpable and overriding error.”**  Questions of mixed law and fact are reviewed on correctness standard if there is an “extricable” legal question or issue of principle, otherwise they are reviewed for palpable and overriding error. 

Note: ***Vavilov*** at paragraphs 50-52 clearly states that a statutory right of appeal is distinct from an application for judicial review, and the ***Housen*** principles do not apply in selecting the standard of review in a judicial review proceeding. 

!!! info "*Housen v. Nikolaisen*, [2002 SCC 33](https://canlii.ca/t/51tl){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - The appellate court **must not retry a case** and **must not substitute its views** for the views of the trial judge according to what the appellate court thinks the evidence establishes on its view of the balance of probabilities. ... uphold the decision unless a palpable error leading to a wrong result has been made by the trial judge.
    -  A. Standard of Review for **Questions of Law**: Thus the standard of review ... is that of correctness.
    -  B. Standard of Review for **Findings of Fact**: such findings are not to be reversed **unless** it can be established that the trial judge made a "**palpable and overriding error**".
    -  C. Standard of Review for **Inferences of Fact**: If there is no palpable and overriding error with respect to the underlying facts that the trial judge relies on to draw the inference, then it is only where the **inference-drawing process itself is palpably in error** that an appellate court can interfere with the factual conclusion. 
    -  D. Standard of Review for **Questions of Mixed Fact and Law**: an error on a question of mixed fact and law can amount to **a pure error of law subject to the correctness standard**. ...what appears to be a question of mixed fact and law, upon further reflection, can actually be an error of pure law. However, in the absence of a legal error or a palpable and overriding error, a finding of negligence by a trial judge should not be interfered with.

**Presumption of Reasonableness Review**

If there is no legislated standard of review, then the court is to engage in reasonableness review.  This is indicated in ***Vavilov***, at paragraph 23.

***Vavilov***, however, outlines three categories of questions that are **exceptions to this presumption of reasonableness**, at paragraph 53:

- **Constitutional** questions are outlined at paragraph 55 

    They include questions of the constitutional validity of legislation (the legislative division of powers in Canada and the Canadian *Charter of Human Rights & Freedoms*); the scope and existence of Aboriginal and treaty rights under s. 35 of the *Constitution Act*, 1982; and other constitutional issues that may be raised in certain cases.

- “General questions of law of **central importance to the legal system** as a whole” are outlined at paragraphs 58-61 of Vavilov.

    They include questions that “require uniform and consistent answers” as a result of “their impact on the administration of justice as a whole” which is a reference to ***Dunsmuir*** (paragraph 60). The questions must be more than just “important” or “significant to the parties” and they rarely arise.  Some examples of where the Supreme Court of Canada has recognized this exception include the Canadian state’s religious duty of neutrality and limits to solicitor-client or parliamentary privilege. 

- Questions regarding jurisdictional boundaries ("**overlapping jurisdiction**") between administrators are referred to in ***Vavilov*** at paragraphs 64-64.

    It is a restatement of the principle from ***Dunsmuir*** (paragraph 61) that requires that the correctness standard to be applied to resolve questions regarding the jurisdictional boundaries between two or more administrative bodies.  An example of this would be the jurisdiction of a labour arbitrator deciding an employee dismissal that was subject to a comprehensive statutory scheme.  This type of question also **rarely arises**. 

For these outlined exceptions, the court is to engage in **correctness** review.

In ***Vavilov***, at paragraphs 69-70, the Court did not completely close the door to other types of questions that may attract correctness review.  There may be cases where there is “a signal of legislative intent as strong and compelling” as a legislated standard of review or a statutory appeal mechanism.    The court also left the door open to apply correctness in cases where “failure to apply correctness review would undermine the rule of law and jeopardize the proper functioning of the justice system in a manner analogous to the three situations described in these reasons.”  All of the situations would be **encountered rarely**. 

## 7.6 Practice Quiz

1. According to Vavilov, which one of the following would **NOT** call for a review on the correctness standard?

    - [ ] An administrative decision on the existence of an indigenous group's treaty rights under s. 35 of the *Constitution Act*, 1982. 
    - [ ] A Human Rights Tribunal member's decision on a matter that is also subject to a provincial Labour Relations Board's jurisdiction. 
    - [x] An administrator's decision relating to a question of "true jurisdiction" 
    - [ ] An administrative decision affecting a lawyer's disclosure of privileged client information 
    > Solictor-Client provision would fall under the "**General questions of law of central importance to the legal system as a whole**" exception in Vavilov and would attract a correctness review.

2. A major change in ***Vavilov*** occurs now in cases where a legislature provides for a statutory right of appeal to the courts AND the legislature has not outlined an applicable standard of review.  In those cases, the standard of review is now determined in accordance with the principles of appellate review set out in ***Housen v Nikolaisen***,

    - [x] True
    - [ ] False

## 7.7 *Vavilov* & the Application of the Reasonableness Standard

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">**Module Content**</p>

Summarizing the ***Vavilov*** framework, **reasonableness** review is the starting point in all cases, subject to the legislation outlining a different standard and statutory appeals now attracting **correctness** review (at least on separable questions of law).

There are also exceptions requiring correctness review as required by the rule of law: the resolution of **constitutional** questions, questions of **central importance** to the legal system as a whole and issues of **overlapping jurisdiction**. 

***Valilov*** makes clear that reasonableness review focuses as much on the **process** of decision-making as it does on the decision itself.  It  should not focus solely on the **outcome** of the decision.  ***Vavilov*** references ***Alberta (Information and Privacy Commissioner) v. Alberta Teachers’ Association*** [***ATA***] to reiterate that the Court had stated this principle before in applying reasonableness standard (***Vavilov***, para 98).

***ATA*** provided an opportunity for the SCC to "address the question of how a court may give adequate deference to a tribunal when a party raises an issue before the court on judicial review, which was never raised before the tribunal and where, as a consequence, the tribunal provided no express reasons with respect to the disposition of that issue." (***ATA***, para 1).

In ***Vavilov***, the court at para 102 warns against a “line-by-line treasure hunt for error.”  Instead, the court recommends a search for “sufficiently serious shortcomings... more than merely superficial or peripheral to the merits of the decision” or flaws that are “sufficiently central or significant.” (***Vavilov***, para. 100). 

Although the majority does not explicitly use the phrase, it is inferred in paragraph 116, where the majority writes that reasonableness review does not allow a court to conduct its own analysis and “ask itself what the correct decision would have been” - that would be **disguised correctness**.

**Evidentiary Considerations**

***Vavilov*** clearly states that fact finding is the responsibility of the administrative decision-maker.  Reviewing courts are **forbidden** from re-weighing facts but a reasonable decision must be justified by the facts.  (paras. 125-126).

The submissions of the parties should be addressed in the decision however the decision-maker cannot be expected to respond to every argument.  The main concern here is that “a decision maker’s failure to **meaningfully grapple with key issues or central arguments** raised by the parties may call into question whether the decision maker was actually alert and sensitive to the matter before it.” (para. 128)

**Reasonableness Review and ***Vavilov*** Acceptability**

***Vavilov*** outlines two features of **an acceptable decision** under reasonableness review:

- The decision is justifiable considering the relevant law and facts that “constrain” the decision-maker (***Vavilov***, paras. 85, 90, 101 & 108). The constraints likely depend on the context and may restrict the decision-makers actions or remedies. Remember that ***Vavilov*** emphasizes the centrality of legislation as a constraint on administrative decision-making. So, a first step in reasonableness review is to look at the relevant legislation.  Statutes set boundaries on administrative decision-making powers and imposes specific requirements that must be followed.  The language of a statute may be broad or permissive OR may be very narrow and contraining (see ***Vavilov***, para 110).
- The decision is based on an internally coherent and rational chain of analysis (explained at paragraph 102 of ***Vavilov***). The decision’s analysis – the justification for the decision -  can be in written reasons or can be inferred, supplemented or surmised from the record before the decision-maker (***Vavilov***, paras. 91 & 97).  ***Vavilov*** explains the concept of “internally coherent and rational chain of analysis” more at paragraphs 102-104.

Some examples that might be **unacceptable** under reasonableness review include:

- Offensive fact-finding: findings that are the equivalent of 2+2=5; controversial assumptions made without evidence, findings without evidence, and a finding completely at odds with the evidentiary record.
- Inexplicable or unexplained jumps in reasoning and the record before the decision-maker which does not shed light on the matter.
- Exercises of decision-maker discretion that are so disproportionate on the facts and the law that they can only be regarded as being the product of arbitrariness or personal spite/motive, or disregard of the statutory objective (think of situations similar to ***Roncarelli v. Duplessis*** which we covered in an earlier Module).

**Common law Constraints on Decision-Makers**

***Vavilov*** makes it clear that the common law imposes several constraints on administrative decision-makers.  At paragraph 111 the court refers back to ***Dunsmuir*** to confirm that “Where a relationship is governed by private law, it would be unreasonable for a decision maker to ignore that law in adjudicating parties’ rights within that relationship.”  Also at paragraph 111, ***Vavilov*** reminds us that statutory phrases may have been interpreted by courts and those interpretations must “generally” be followed.  

**International law Constraints**

International law can also constrain administrative decisions and Canadian legislation is presumed to operate in conformity with international obligations. At paragraph 114 in ***Vavilov*** the court references ***Baker v Canada*** to repeat that international conventions can inform whether the exercise of an administrative power was reasonable.

**Administrative Precedents and Constraints on the Decision-Maker**

Administrative precedents can constrain decision-makers.  ***Vavilov*** at para 131 states that “Whether a particular decision is consistent with the administrative body’s past decisions is also a constraint that the reviewing court should consider when determining whether an administrative decision is reasonable. Where a decision maker does depart from longstanding practices or established internal authority, it bears the **justificatory burden of explaining that departure** in its reasons.”

!!! info "Paul Daly, *The Vavilov Framework and the Future of Canadian Administrative Law*, p 12-22, "Reasonableness Review""

    - h
