---
layout: post
title: "Section 2: Introduction"
date: 2024-12-17
draft: false
categories:
  - Computer
tags:
  - Node.js
---

## Pros and Cons of `node.js`

<table class="styled-table">
    <thead>
    <tr>
        <th>Pros</th>
        <th>Use</th>
        <th>Dong't Use</th>
    </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>Single-threaded, based on event driven, non-blocking I/O model</td>
        <td>API with database behind it (preferably NoSQL)</td>
        <td>Applications with heavy server-side processing (CPU-intensive)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Perfect for building fast and scalable data-intensive apps</td>
        <td>Server-side web application</td>
        <td></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>NPM, huge library and active communities</td>
        <td>Data streaming (YouTube) & Real-time chat application</td>
        <td></td>
    </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

## Enter and Exit Node.js

After you install the `node.js`, you can use `Terminal` to access it.

```js
// enter node.js
> node
>
```

```js
// exit node.js
> .exit
// or you can press
> Ctrl + D
```

## Find global variables of node.js

press `tab` once or twice to check out all variables.

## Write and run a js file

- create a `index.js` for example
- go the file folder, type `node` followed by the file name `index.js`

## Use of a module

For example, if we want to use module `fs`, the file system module, we need to load the module to a variable first.

```js
// fs is "file system" module
const fs = require("fs");
```

### How to find modules for your current `node.js` version?

First, go to [nodejs.org](https://nodejs.org/en){:target="\_blank"}.

I'm using v22.12.0, so I go find the [related version of modules](https://nodejs.org/docs/latest-v22.x/api/index.html){:target="\_blank"}.

> **Concatenate and extract content from a variable**
>
> ```js
> const textPre = "description of avocado";
> const textTogether = `This is ${textPre}`;
> ```

## Read and Write a file

```js
// read a file:
const textIn = fs.readFileSync("./txt/input.txt", "utf-8");
```

```js
// create some texts in a variable and write and save it to a file:
const textOut = `Why do they call it Bear Valley?' Emily asked. 
${textIn} \nCreated on ${Date.now()}`;
fs.writeFileSync("./txt/output.txt", textOut);
```

## Synchronous and Non-Synchronous

**Synchronous:** each line of code is executed one by one, the next line of code not being executed until the last one's execution is completed.

> **Blocking code:** as in synchronous execution model, the next line cannot be executed until the previous one is finished with execution, it is called blocking code.

**Asynchronous:** the execution of a heavy load code is running at the background, while the computer proceeds with the next line, not waiting for the result to come out. A call-back function will tell the computer what to do when the background-running code is finished with execution. This is called **Non-Blocking** code.

Asynchronous coding is important is because `node.js` is **single-threaded**.

Code Example:

```js
// we use same module `fs`, but this time, for its asynchronous function
fs.readFile("./txt/input.txt", "utf-8", (error, data) => console.log(data));
// the computer continue to execute the next line of code
console.log("reading file...");
```

For this non-blocking purpose, the whole `node.js` code is built on call-back functions.

### Callback Hell

When too many lawyers of callback functions are nested, it soon becomes hard to read and understand. It has been given a specific name: **Callback Hell**.
