---
layout: post
title: L525 Unit 3
date: 2026-02-01
draft: false
categories:
  - Law
tags:
  - LAW_V 525 99C 2025W2 Canadian Criminal Law and Procedure
  - Unit 3
---

#  Acts and Omissions

<!-- #### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">**Module Content**</p> -->

## 3.1 Introduction

At common law, and now under section 7 of the Charter, every criminal offence must include **prohibited conduct** (*actus reus*) accompanied by the **requisite mental state** (*mens rea*).

This unit focuses on the essential elements of the *actus reus*. The Crown must prove each element of the *actus reus* **beyond a reasonable doubt**.

### Textbook Summary: pp 345-346

**Chapter 5: CONDUCT OR *ACTUS REUS***

The principle of legality excludes **retroactive application** of the criminal law and, according to Canadian constitutional jurisprudence examined in Chapter 1, it excludes the enforcement of offences that are impermissibly vague or overly broad.

One of the foundational principles of criminal liability is found in the maxim *actus non facit reum nisi mens sit rea*, which, translated, states that an act is not guilty unless there is also a guilty mind. The same might be said in reverse: there can be no criminal liability unless a guilty mind expresses itself in the performance of prohibited conduct. 

**Lord Mansfield** said as much in 1784:
> So long as an act rests in bare intention, it is not punishable by our laws” (***Rex v Scofield*** (1784), Caldecott’s Rep 397). 

The concept of *actus reus* refers to more than simply a prohibited action; *actus reus* comprises a bundle of components that, together, constitute the “guilty act.” Put most helpfully, the *actus reus* requires a 

- **Physical voluntariness** – that the Accused did the prohibited physical action on purpose (this is discussed more in the next topic)
- **Act or omission** – what the Accused physically did (or didn’t do in the case of an omission)
- Sometimes in **prescribed circumstances** – for instance, if someone is charged with “assaulting a police officer”, the prescribed circumstance is that the assaulted person must have been a police officer.
- Sometimes causing **certain consequences** – for example, if someone is charged with “assault causing bodily harm”, the required consequence of the prohibited act (the assault) is that the assaulted person was harmed.

Each of these components is equally critical to defining the *actus reus* for a given offence, and the starting point is that a finding of guilt requires that the Crown **prove each** beyond a reasonable doubt. 

---

## 3.2 Voluntariness

**Defining Physical Voluntariness**

Physical voluntariness is an essential element of the *actus reus* of every criminal offence. Without physical voluntariness there is no crime.

> Voluntariness, as it relates to the *actus reus* of a crime, queries whether the actor had “control over the movement of her body”, or whether the wrongful act was the product of a “**conscious will**”.

> CITATION: *Criminal Pleadings and Practice in Canada (Ewaschuk)*, 2nd edition online, Part VII — GENERAL DEFENCES – Chapter 21 — GENERAL DEFENCES. G. Ewaschuk 

### Textbook Summary: pp 346-347

**I. VOLUNTARINESS**

The first of the elements of the *actus reus* is the requirement for voluntary conduct. Voluntariness is a requirement for every offence, whether a true crime or a quasi-criminal/regulatory offence. The requirement for voluntariness is best thought of as a demand that the prohibited conduct be **a product of the will** of the accused. 

The essential characteristic of voluntariness is the **conscious control of action**. Consciousness alone, however, is not enough to establish voluntariness because a person might be conscious and yet still be incapable of controlling his or her conduct. In sum, **the voluntariness of a person’s conduct will be established if his or her conduct is the product of conscious choice.** 

The decision in ***R. v. Larsonneur (1934)***, 24 Cr. App. R. 74 (Court of Criminal Appeal, England) is a case that demonstrates what can occur if voluntariness is not an essential element of an offence.

!!! info "*R v Larsonneur (1934)*, 24 Cr App R 74"

    - **Facts**: Larsonneur had a French passport and was granted access to England. Her passport was marked to say that she had to leave the country by a certain date. She left England on that date for Ireland, but was deported from Ireland and was sent back to England in Irish custody. She was found in England, and this was after the date that her passport allowed her to be in the country. She was convicted under the *Aliens Restrictions Act* for being in the country as an alien to whom **leave to land** had been refused. She was convicted at second trial and appealed on conviction.
    - **Issue**: Does it matter that she did not re-enter England on her own accord, but was forced to do so?
    - **Decision**: Appeal Dismissed
    - ***Ratio decidendi***: Even if you are physically forced to commit the *actus reus* of an offence against your will, you have still committed it for legal purposes (**this is no longer the case**).

---

**The Test for Physical Voluntariness**

Each of these excerpted decisions and summaries provides further insight into voluntariness: ***Kilbride v. Lake***, [1962] NZLR 590 (New Zealand Supreme Court), ***The Queen v. King***, [1962 CanLII 16 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1tvrn){:target=" \_blank"}, ***R. v. Ruzic***, [2001 SCC 24](https://canlii.ca/t/520x){:target=" \_blank"}.

The Supreme Court of Canada decision in ***Ruzic*** confirms that both at common law and under section 7 of the *Charter*, there can be no criminal liability unless the conduct was voluntary. 

The test for physical voluntariness set out by the Court is that it requires a “**conscious mind and a controlled body**” – if either of these is lacking, there is no physical voluntariness, and no crime has occurred. 

In contrast, ***Ruzic*** explains that **==moral voluntariness== relates to whether the Accused had an autonomous or free will**. Moral involuntariness does not negate *actus reus* or *mens rea*, but may operate as a defence.

### Textbook Summary: pp 348-351"

!!! info "*Kilbride v Lake*, [1962] NZLR 590 (SC)"

    - The issue ... whether something done perfectly lawfully by the appellant could become an offence on his party by reasons of **an intervening cause beyond his influence or control**, and which produced an effect entirely outside his means of knowledge. ... 

        > a person cannot be convicted of any crime unless he has committed an overt act prohibited by the law, or has made default in some act which there was a legal obligation to do. The act or omission must be voluntary (*10 Halsbury’s Laws of England*, 3rd ed., 272).

    - He must be shown to be responsible for the physical ingredient of the crime or offence. This elementary principle obviously involves the proof of something which goes behind any subsequent and any additional inquiry that might become necessary as to whether *mens rea* must be proved as well. **Until that initial proof exists arguments concerning *mens rea* are premature.** ... 
    - The primary question arising on this appeal, in my opinion, is **whether or not the physical element in the offence was produced by the appellant**. This physical element may be described by the convenient term *acts reus*, in contrast to the mental element or *mens rea* which is also an ingredient of a crime or offence, unless expressly excluded by its statutory definition.
    - freedom to take one course or another ... But this **mental stimulus** required to promote acts or available to promote omissions if the matter is adverted to, and consequently able to produce some forbidden condition, is entirely **distinct from the mental element contained in the concept of *mens rea***. The **latter** is the intention or the knowledge behind or accompanying the exercise of will, while the **former** is simply the spark without which the *actus reus* cannot be produced at all. 
    - In these circumstances I do not think it can be said that the *actus reus* was in any sense the result of his conduct, whether intended or accidental. The resulting omission to carry the warrant was **not within his conduct, knowledge or control**. ... 
    - For the foregoing reasons I am of the opinion that the **physical ingredient of this charge was not proved against the appellant**.

In ***R v King***, the accused ... physical and mental condition ... induce a state of amnesia accompanied by a period during which an individual may feel competent to drive a car, only to suddenly lose conscious awareness. The Supreme Court of Canada ... dismissed the Crown’s appeal, ... explaining: 

> It is my view that there can be no *actus reus* unless it is the result of a willing mind at liberty to make a definite choice or decision, or in other words, there must be a willpower to do an act whether the accused knew or not that it was prohibited by law” (at 749). 

Supreme Court of Canada has built on the concept of **physical voluntariness** to develop a broader conception of **“moral” involuntariness** applicable to defences such as the defence of duress. This expansion of the relevance of the idea of voluntariness took place in the following case. Although this expanded concept is not of concern in this chapter, the Court in ***Ruzic*** made some important statements about the concept of physical voluntariness.

!!! info "*R. v. Ruzic*, [2001 SCC 24](https://canlii.ca/t/520x){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - [34] ... criminal responsibility be ascribed only to acts that resulted from the choice of a conscious mind and an autonomous will. In other words, only those persons acting in the knowledge of what they were doing, with the freedom to choose, would bear the burden and stigma of criminal responsibility. Although the element of voluntariness may **sometimes overlap** both *actus reus* and *mens rea* (see ***R. v. Daviault***, [1994] 3 S.C.R. 63, at pp. 73-75, per **Cory J.**), the importance of *mens rea* and of the quality of voluntariness in it underscores the fact that criminal liability is founded on the premise that it will be borne only by those persons who knew what they were doing and willed it. ...
    - [43] Let us examine the notion of “voluntariness” and its interplay with duress more closely. As **Dickson J.** stated in ***R. v. Rabey***, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 513, at p. 522, “**it is a basic principle that absence of volition in respect of the act involved is always a defence to a crime.** A defence that the act is involuntary entitles the accused to a complete and unqualified acquittal.” **Dickson J.**’s pronouncement was endorsed by the Court in ***R. v. Parks***, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 871. The principle of voluntariness was given constitutional status in ***Daviault***, supra, at pp. 102-3, where **Cory J.** held for the majority that it would infringe s. 7 of the *Charter* to convict an accused who was not acting voluntarily, as a fundamental aspect of the *actus reus* would be absent. More recently, in ***R. v. Stone***, [1999] 2 S.C.R. 290, the crucial role of voluntariness as a condition of the attribution of criminal liability was again confirmed (at para. 1, per **Binnie J.**, and paras. 155-58, per **Bastarache J.**) in an appeal concerning the defence of automatism.
    - [45] What underpins ... these conceptions of voluntariness is the **critical importance of autonomy in the attribution of criminal liability**: ***Perka*** [ [1984] 2 SCR 232] at pp. 250-51; Fletcher [*Rethinking Criminal Law*, (Boston: Little, Brown, 1978)] at p. 805. **The treatment of criminal offenders as rational, autonomous and choosing agents is a fundamental organizing principle of our criminal law.**
    - [46] Punishing a person whose actions are involuntary in the physical sense is unjust because it conflicts with the **assumption in criminal law** that individuals are **autonomous** and **freely choosing agents**.

Consistent with the ordinary rule for elements of the *actus reus*, **the Crown must prove physical voluntariness beyond a reasonable doubt**.

---

## 3.3 Acts & Omissions

Most criminal offences require that an Accused commit a **positive act**. This is the physical action that the Accused must do in order to complete the *actus reus* of an offence.

Only certain offences can be committed by **failing to act** (e.g. **omissions**). These involve situations where the Accused was **under a legal duty** to act and failed to do so. There is some debate, however, about what should be the **source of such legal duties**. 

**Prohibited Acts**

Identifying and interpreting prohibited “acts” is relatively straightforward. You should look for action words (verbs) in the offence to identify such prohibited acts. Examples are given in the casebook, such as “break”, “communicate”, “operate”, “sell” or “transfer”.

As noted above, sometimes the “acts” are explicitly defined in the Criminal Code. You should look at the “related provisions” section after the offence in your annotated *Criminal Code* to see if a definition appears elsewhere in the *Criminal Code*. For example, s.5(1) of the *Controlled Drugs and Substances Act* makes it an offence to traffic drugs (a positive act) and trafficking is defined in s.2 of the Act.

Recall from Unit 1, Topic 4 that the **purposive and contextual approach** to statutory interpretation from ***Bell ExpressVu Limited Partnership v. Rex, et al.***, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 554 is used to interpret words used in the *Criminal Code*. Accordingly, you should use that test to interpret any *actus reus* language in a criminal offence that is not already defined for you.

### Textbook Summary: pp 352-353

**II. ACTS, OMISSIONS, AND STATUS**

In defining the *actus reus*, it is crucial to ascertain as precisely as possible the conduct that is prohibited. This section will make clear that the law generally favours criminal punishment only for **actions**, but that there are certain circumstances in which **omissions, or failures to act**, may be punishable in the criminal law. 

As you will see, **status offences**, which purport to punish in the complete absence of either an act or an omission, are deeply problematic but also exceedingly rare.

**A. ACTS**

The act is thus the “**verb**” in the definition of criminal liability, and it is “**positive**” in the sense that walking or running, as opposed to standing still, would be considered “positive.” Offences premised on some such positive act, rather than mere passivity or omitting to do something, are the **norm**. 

In some instances, Parliament has provided **definitions** in an attempt to clarify what is meant by specific terms used in the definition of prohibited conduct. Note that such words are often given **a limited meaning** in relation to **specific offences**. In instances in which Parliament has offered no guidance or definition specifying what is contemplated by a particular act, one must look to the common law to find **judicial interpretation of the term**.

---

**Criminal Liability by Omission**

For certain offences, a failure to act can constitute the *actus reus* of a criminal offence. This can be controversial since it expands the scope of criminal liability beyond acts, using the coercive power of the state to compel a person to do something in a given situation. However, many people in society are under **important legal duties** (e.g. police officers, doctors, parents, construction site managers, etc.), which **if not done can result in serious harm to others**, often vulnerable individuals.

<!-- <u>Omissions</u>

As you read this brief introduction to liability for inaction or omissions, consider the following questions: Why can only certain criminal offences be committed by failing to act (e.g. omissions)? What should be the source of legal duties to ground criminal liability by omissions? Why? -->

<u>***R. v. Browne***</u>

The decision in ***R. v. Browne***, (1997), 116 CCC (3d) 183 (Ontario Court of Appeal) is interesting because it shows how legal duties giving rise to criminal liability may apply or not apply in a given case, and the **limitations** of the legal duty created in section 217 of the *Criminal Code*. 

<u>***R. v. Thornton***</u>

The decision in ***R. v. Thornton***, (1991), 3 CR (4th) 381 (Ontario Court of Appeal), and the subsequent Supreme Court of Canada decision, ask us to consider whether there is a legal duty to **disclose HIV+ status as a blood donor**. More generally, this case is about whether criminal liability should be expanded for a failure to act based on the recognition of **common law duties**? 

<u>***R. v. Mabior***</u>

In ***R. v. Mabior***, 2012 SCC 47, the Supreme Court of Canada recently considered whether a person who engages in sexual relations without disclosing their HIV+ status commits **aggravated sexual assault**.

<u>***R. v. Hutchinson***</u>

In ***R. v. Hutchinson***, 2014 SCC 19, the Supreme Court of Canada applied the test from ***Mabior*** to uphold a sexual assault conviction of an individual who poked holes into condoms he used to attempt to get his girlfriend pregnant.


The **common factor in omission offences** is that they all require people to act in a way that fulfills a duty that is imposed upon them. Sometimes this duty is built right into a *Criminal Code* offence section. These are called “**specific omission offences**” and their *Code* sections both create a duty to act and then criminalize a failure to meet that duty. An example is s.129(1)(b) which makes it an offence to not assist a peace officer.

There are also “**general omission offences**” which are more vague. These sections criminalize a failure to **perform a duty that is undefined**. For example criminal negligence which makes it an offence to fail to do anything that is one’s duty to do with wanton or reckless disregard for the safety of others. For general omission offences, these “legal duties” can come from one of two places: **statute** or the **common law**. 

- Statutory duties are written right into the *Code* itself or another piece of legislation. 
- Common law duties are more controversial and are created when someone undertakes to do something in the nature of **a binding commitment**. That commitment must be **expressed clearly** and others must place **reliance on it** (see ***R. v. Browne***).

How do we reconcile the idea of a common law duty to act giving rise to an omission offence, in light of *Charter* section 9? **The common law in these cases only creates the duty**. It is the *Criminal Code* section (e.g. **s.217 or s.219**) that then **creates the offence**. This is how common law duties to act are not contrary to s.9, they does not create offences. Rather, they create duties that statutory sections then criminalize a failure to act on.

### Textbook Summary: pp 353-362, pp 658-659

**B. OMISSIONS**

Much of the controversy about liability for omissions relates to the extent to which the criminal law should create positive duties and then sanction non-compliance with them. 

Thus, the starting point is that the criminal law will not punish for a mere failure to act. Yet there are certain circumstances under which the criminal law will overcome its reticence to punish for inaction. Put briefly, **the law will only find someone criminally liable for an omission when that person was subject to a legal duty to act**. 

... liability for omissions is exceptional and reflects the policy choice that liability for inaction should not be generalized. Yet, ...it turns out that there is considerable scope for liability based on omissions in Canadian criminal law. 

First, the *Criminal Code* includes certain offences that explicitly punish the failure to act in a certain fashion. These might be labelled “**specific omission offences**.” 

Yet the source of the greatest scope for the criminalization of omissions is in what we might call “**general omission offences**.” Most notable in this regard are the crime of **common nuisance** and the definitions of **“criminal negligence” and “duty”** in s 219 of the *Criminal Code*.

Both common nuisance and criminal negligence (causing bodily harm or causing death, as the case may be) create the possibility for criminal punishment based on the failure to perform a legal duty. Neither specifies what legal duties might “plug in,” referring instead generally to a “duty imposed by law” or a “legal duty.” 

**What legal duties provide a sufficient basis for criminal liability?** 

As explained by **Dickson J** in ***Moore v. The Queen***, [1978 CanLII 160 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1z76c){:target=" \_blank"}, above, there are two candidates: duties found in **statutes** and duties found in **common law**. 

Consider the following case, which is an example of the interaction of the definition of criminal negligence and the duty imposed by s 217[^1] of the *Criminal Code*, but also provides an interpretation of the word “undertakes” found in that section.

[^1]: 217 Every one who undertakes to do an act is under a legal duty to do it if an omission to do the act is or may be **dangerous to life**. 

!!! info "*R. v. Browne*, [1997 CanLII 1744 (ON CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/6h8v){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - [1] ... The issue in this appeal is whether the trial judge erred in concluding that the appellant had caused Audrey Greiner’s death by breaching **a legal duty** arising from an “**undertaking**” within the meaning of s. 217 of the *Criminal Code* to take her to the hospital. Only if the appellant can be found to have given an undertaking giving rise to a legal duty under s. 217 can he be found criminally negligent for “**omitting to do anything that it is his duty to do**” within the meaning of s. 219 of the Code.
    - [14] Under s. 217, there is no pre-existing relationship or situation that creates a legal duty; there must be an undertaking before a legal duty is introduced into the relationship.
    - [15] **What kind of an undertaking gives rise to a legal duty** within the meaning of s. 217, the breach of which can result in criminal culpability? The threshold definition must be sufficiently **high** to justify such serious penal consequences. The mere expression of words indicating a willingness to do an act cannot trigger the legal duty. There must be something in the nature of a **commitment**, generally, though not necessarily, **upon which reliance can reasonably be said to have been placed**. 
    - [19] There being no undertaking within the meaning of s. 217 of the *Criminal Code*, there can be no finding of a legal duty. There being no duty, there can be no breach contrary to s. 219 of the *Code*.

It would appear that duties established in **provincial legislation** can also serve as legal duties sufficient to ground liability in general omission offences. This creates an intriguing **division of powers problem**.

The most fraught issue in this area is whether one can base criminal liability on failure to perform **a common law duty**. As you read in ***Browne***, **Abella JA** expressed concern about importing notions of civil negligence into the criminal law, which would 

> [render] individuals who breach civil standards of care susceptible to imprisonment. 

This is not a concern merely about the mixing of standards of fault but also about the structure of the criminal law and the idea of codification. Recall s 9 of the *Criminal Code*, which states, in part, that

<!-- 
        - (1) Every one who commits a common nuisance and thereby 
            
            - (a) endangers the lives, safety or health of the public, or 
            - (b) causes physical injury to any person,
        
            is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years. 
         -->

> no person shall be convicted or discharged under section 730 ... of **an offence at common law**.

!!! info "*R. v. Thornton*, [1991 CanLII 7212 (ON CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/g19s2){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - s. 180 of the *Criminal Code* are:
        - (2) For the purposes of this section, every one commits a common nuisance who does **an unlawful act** or **fails to discharge a legal duty** and thereby 
            - (a) endangers the lives, safety, health, property or comfort of the public;  or 
            - (b) obstructs the public in the exercise or enjoyment of any right that is common to all the subjects of Her Majesty in Canada.
    - I will deal **first with the argument** that the appellant’s conduct did not amount to an offence known to law. ... I am of the opinion that the **legal duty** referred to in s. 180(2) is a duty which is imposed by **statute** or which arises at **common law**. It becomes necessary, then, to decide whether at common law there is a duty which would **prohibit the donating of blood** known to be HIV contaminated to the Red Cross.
    - ... the common law has recognized a very fundamental duty, which while it has many qualifications, can be summed up as being a duty to **refrain from conduct which could cause injury to another person**. 
    - It is not necessary to decide in this case how far that duty extends. At the very least, however, it requires everyone to refrain from conduct which it is reasonably foreseeable could cause serious harm to other persons. It is therefore my conclusion that the indictment which alleges the commission of a nuisance by the donation of blood which the appellant knew to be HIV contaminated does allege an offence known to law.
    - ... s. 9(a) of the *Code* **abolishes common law offences**. However, ... statutory definition of a common nuisance contained in the *Code* “does not differ from a criminal common nuisance at common law.”
    - consider the appellant’s **second argument**, namely that it was not proved that the donation by the appellant of HIV contaminated blood endangered the lives or health of the public. ... Section 180 requires that the conduct of a person “endanger” the lives or health of the public. **It does not require actual injury or damage**.
    - I now turn to consider his **third argument** that the appellant did not have the *mens rea* necessary to have found a conviction. ... This appellant knew personally the danger to which the public was subjected by his donation of blood. He clearly had *mens rea*.


Canadian criminal law remains surprisingly **unsettled** on the duties that might be invoked to establish liability for **omissions**. As a matter of principle, it seems that such liability should be limited to instances in which Parliament, acting under its authority to enact criminal law, has created a statutory duty. Only this is consistent with the **abolition of common law crimes** and the **principle of legality, including the protection against vagueness or overbreadth**. 

Statutory duties enacted by Parliament without reliance on its power over criminal law, and a *fortiori* duties enacted by provincial legislatures, are created for a purpose other than marking the boundary between criminal and non-criminal conduct. A breach of such duties in no way entails criminal sanction, and there is no principled basis to say that it should. 

The only argument would be that breach of a civil (that is, non-criminal) duty is an unlawful act and as such merits criminal sanction **when it causes a result that is prohibited by the criminal law**. This might have been acceptable in a unified jurisdiction that allowed for common law crimes, but today the case is weak. It would, in theory, allow a prosecution for manslaughter where a tort of civil negligence leads to death.

<p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">Criminal liability for non-compliance with legal duties should be **restricted to statutory duties** enacted by Parliament in reliance on s 91(27) of the *Constitution Act*, 1867, 30 & 31 Victoria, c 3.</p>


**Note on *R. v. Hutchinson***

In ***Hutchinson***,  the Court unanimously upheld a conviction for sexual assault. T

he Court approached this case as raising a question of statutory interpretation and, in particular, as requiring the Court to consider how to draw a clear line between criminal and non-criminal conduct, while avoiding the **risk of over-criminalization**. 

Two issues were raised by these facts: 

- (1) had the complainant even consented and 
- (2) was her consent vitiated by fraud, according to the ***Mabior/Cuerrier*** analysis? 

The majority concluded that the complainant had consented to the specific physical act of sexual intercourse, but that her consent was vitiated by fraud. Specifically, for the **first part** of the test set out in ***Mabior/Cuerrier***, Hutchinson’s decision to use sabotaged condoms constituted dishonesty. The **second part** of the ***Mabior/Cuerrier*** test for fraud asks if there was “deprivation,” specifically interpreted in the HIV cases to require a significant risk of serious bodily harm. 

Given that pregnancy causes “profound changes in a woman’s body” (at para 70), this constituted a deprivation that was as serious as the “significant risk of serious bodily harm” (at para 70) required in ***Cuerrier*** and ***Mabior***. 

---

**Study Tips**

Be confident in your ability to identify the *actus reus* of an offence. What would you say is the actus reus of each?

- **176(2)** Every one who wilfully disturbs or interrupts an assemblage of persons met for religious worship or for a moral, social or benevolent purpose is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
    - **Act**: to disturb or interrupt, 
    - **Circumstance**: persons assembled for religious worship or for a moral, social or benevolent purpose, 
    - **Consequence**: none required.
- **180(1)** Every one who commits a common nuisance and thereby (a) endangers the lives, safety or health of the public, or (b) causes physical injury to any person.
    - **Act**: to commit a common nuisance, 
    - **Circumstance**: in a situation that endangers the lives, safety or health of the public, OR 
    - **Consequence**: where physical injury is caused to any person.
- **181** Every one who wilfully publishes a statement, tale or news that he knows is false and that causes or is likely to cause injury or mischief to a public interest is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.
    - **Act**: to publish a statement, tale or news, 
    - **Circumstance**: where it is likely to cause injury or mischief to a public interest, 
    - **Consequence**: causes or is likely to cause injury or mischief. Note that in this offence, knowing the news to be false would be part of the *mens rea* of the offence, NOT the *actus reus*.

Be able to define an **omission offence** in your own words. Know that they can be created by statute (the most common) or by common law (less common). In what circumstances can the common law impose on someone a duty to act?

When considering a fact pattern with an omission offence, first ask yourself “**was there a duty to act?**” And if so, “**what section of the Code (if statutory) created that duty?**” Next consider whether that **duty applied** to the Accused in your fact pattern. Finally, if the duty applied, you will want to analyse whether the Accused **met/fulfilled/discharged that duty**.


## 3.4 Causation & Consequences

**==Some criminal offences== require that the Accused’s act or omission cause a certain consequence or result.** “Causation” is the link between the act or omission and the alleged consequence or result: the prohibited conduct (act/omission) causes the prohibited consequence for there to be liability. Where they are part of an offence, causation and the prohibited consequence must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt by the Crown.

**Introduction to Consequences and Causation**

!!! note "Reading"

    - Read pages 366 to 398 of the Casebook: Introduction and ***R. v. Winning***

This brief reading provides an introduction to consequences and causation. It gives the example of ***R. v. Winning (1973)***, 12 CCC (2d) 449 (Ontario Court of Appeal) which is a case that resulted in an acquittal due to a lack of causation.

A criminal offence may explicitly use the word “cause”, or causation may be implied through the wording of the offence. For example, culpable homicide explicitly requires proof that the Accused “caused” death (the consequence). In other offences, causation appears less obviously and may be more relaxed. For instance, public incitement of hatred requires that the Accused’s statement be communicated in a public place, that hatred be incited against an identifiable group, and that the situation is likely to lead to a breach of the peace – **an implied causation requirement of certain possible consequences**.

Consider the following offences and see if you can identify the prohibited act and the prohibited consequence that it must cause. Use the Discussion Groups to ask your Course Instructor for help if you are unsure.

### Textbook Summary: ***R. v. Winning***, [2002 CanLII 5189 (ON CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/1dtkn){:target=" \_blank"}

When an offence prohibits a specified result, proof of causation is plainly an essential element, without which the prosecution must fail. 

!!! info "*R. v. Winning*, [2002 CanLII 5189 (ON CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/1dtkn){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - Admittedly, the appellant applied for credit at Eaton’s. She filled out an application for that purpose giving her proper name and address. In the particulars which she gave she made at least **two false statements**. Had Eaton’s relied upon that application form then she would have been guilty of the offence charged, although it must be mentioned in passing that in fact she honoured her obligation and paid Eaton’s on every occasion credit was advanced to her. However, **the evidence clearly establishes that Eaton’s did not rely upon the information contained in the application save for the name and address.** 
    - Accordingly, in our view, the appellant did not obtain credit by a false pretence, because the credit was given not in reliance on her application, but rather in reliance on Eaton’s investigation of her. The only matter upon which the company relied was her name and address, both of which were correctly given. 

In ***R. v. Gentles***, [2016 BCCA 68](https://canlii.ca/t/gnbwt){:target=" \_blank"}, the accused was charged with a series of driving offences after he struck two pedestrians, injuring one and killing the other. The accused was impaired when the accident occurred. However, the trial judge acquitted him ... because ... the victims had walked into the path of the accused’s vehicle, making the accident unavoidable. ... the Court of Appeal affirmed the acquittals on the charges of impaired driving causing bodily harm and death because, although 

> [t]here is no question Mr. Gentles was impaired, ... the finding that one and a half seconds was insufficient time to avoid the accident means the Crown did not prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the impairment was a contributing cause to the death and injuries resulting from it” (at para 24). 

Having demonstrated that a line can be drawn connecting the accused’s conduct to the prohibited consequence, the **more difficult question** is deciding whether this **causal connection is sufficiently strong to support criminal liability**. 

---

**Establishing Causation**

Factual situations that raise causation as an issue can become extremely complicated. It is a good idea sometimes to draw out a diagram of the facts to help clearly identify the role of the Accused in a situation, as well as to note any **potential intervening acts**, **pre-existing frailties** of the victim (e.g. the “**thin skull rule**”), or c**ontributions of any third parties**.

Causation is one of the more challenging topics in criminal law because of the need to assess and analyze a multiplicity of facts and determine their legal significance.

The Supreme Court of Canada decision in ***Smithers v. The Queen***, [1978] 1 SCR 506 is a decision setting out, and applying, the **historic test** for causation at common law which, we will see in subsequent cases, has been since been **modified**. 

It is notable that **Justice Dickson** finds:

> Even if the unlawful act alone, would not have caused the death, it was still a legal cause, so long as it contributed in some way to the death”, 
 
adding that an Accused “must take his victim as he finds him” (emphasis added). However, he also acknowledges that certain things can prevent the Accused from being held responsible for causation, including concepts such as **remoteness** or **incorrect medical treatment**.

### Textbook Summary: ***Smithers v. The Queen***, [1978] 1 SCR 506

!!! info "*Smithers v. R.*, [1977 CanLII 7 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1mk9r){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - It is important in considering the issue of causation in homicide to distinguish between causation as **a question of fact** and causation as **a question of law**. The factual determination is whether A caused B. The answer to the factual question can only come from the evidence of witnesses. It has nothing to do with intention, foresight or risk.
    - **The issue of causation is for the jury and not the experts**. The weight to be given to the evidence of the experts was entirely for the jury. In the search for truth, **the jury was entitled to consider all of the evidence, expert and lay, and accept or reject any part of it**. Non-medical testimony is available to both the Crown and the accused, and in the instant case lay evidence was vital to the defence raised by the appellant.
    - The second sub-question raised is whether there was evidence on the basis of which the jury was entitled to find that it had been established **beyond a reasonable doubt that the kick caused the death**. In answer to this question it may shortly be said that there was a very substantial body of evidence, both expert and lay, before the jury indicating that **the kick was at least a contributing cause of death**, outside the *de minimis* range, and that is all that the Crown was required to establish. **It is immaterial that the death was in part caused by a malfunctioning epiglottis, to which malfunction the appellant may, or may not, have contributed.** 
    - The third sub-question is whether there was evidence from which the jury was entitled to find that it had been established **beyond a reasonable doubt** that the** kick caused the aspiration**. I do not agree. A person commits homicide, according to s. 205(1) of the *Code*, **when directly or indirectly, by any means, he causes the death of a human being**. Once evidence had been led concerning the relationship between the kick and the vomiting, leading to aspiration of stomach contents and asphyxia, the contributing condition of a malfunctioning epiglottis would not prevent conviction for manslaughter. **Death may have been unexpected and the physical reactions of the victim unforeseen, but that does not relieve the appellant**.
    - It is a well-recognized principle that one who assaults another must take his victim as he finds him. Although causation in civil cases differs from that in a criminal case, the “**thin skulled man**” may appear in the criminal law as in the civil law. The case of ***R. v. Nicholson (1926)***, 47 C.C.C. 113 (C.A.), will serve as an illustration.

***Smithers*** establishes a very **low threshold for causation in the criminal law. It is, however, a pre-*Charter* case, decided in 1978. 

In 1994, with the *Charter* in hand, the Ontario Court of Appeal considered the constitu-tionality of the Smithers causation test in ***R. v. Cribbin***, [1994 CanLII 391 (ON CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/6jxc){:target=" \_blank"}. The appellant’s central argument was that the requirement for causation is a principle of fundamental justice and that the *de minimis* test does not satisfy this requirement, because it allows someone to be convicted of manslaughter when their acts are too causally remote from the death. Justice Arbour (who later sat on the Supreme Court of Canada) found that, combined with the need for an appropriate level of fault, the causation standard set in ***Smithers*** was constitutionally compliant.

> As the law of manslaughter stands, if a person commits an unlawful dangerous act, in circumstances where a reasonable person would have foreseen the risk of bodily harm which is neither trivial nor transitory, and the unlawful act is at least a contributing cause of the victim’s death, outside the *de minimis* range, then the person is guilty of manslaughter.

---

In ***R. v. Nette***, [2001] 3 SCR 488, the Supreme Court of Canada sets out the **current test for causation** for criminal offences.

Justice Arbour, for the majority, held that the test for causation is whether the conduct of the Accused was a “**significant contributing cause**” of the prohibited consequence. **This test applies to all homicide offences, and is the general test for causation for other Criminal Code offences.** 


### Textbook Summary

The ***Smithers*** test governs analysis of legal causation for almost all crimes in Canada. There is, however, one area of the criminal law in which a different and **more stringent causation test** is used. The Supreme Court established this higher threshold for causation, applicable to a subset of the forms of first-degree murder, in the ***Harbottle*** decision.

!!! info "*R. v. Harbottle*, [1993 CanLII 71 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fs0z){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - The difficulties caused by such an interpretation can be readily appreciated when the old and new wording is juxtaposed: 

        > Old — “by his own act caused or assisted in causing the death” 
        >
        > New — ”when the death is caused by that person.”

        It can be seen that Parliament deleted both the words “his own act” and “caused or assisted in causing” and replaced them simply with the word “**caused**.” That single word is, in my view, **broad enough to include both perpetrators and those who assist in the murder** and come within the purview of the substantial cause test I will set out later.  

    - The consequences of a conviction for **first degree murder** and the wording of the section are such that the **test of causation for s. 214(5) must be a strict one**. In my view, an accused may only be convicted under the subsection if the Crown establishes that the accused has committed **an act or series of acts** which are of such a nature that they must be regarded as **a substantial and integral cause of the death**. 
    - Obviously, this requirement is much higher than that described in ***Smithers v. The Queen***, [1978] 1 S.C.R. 506, which dealt with the offence of manslaughter. There it was held at p. 519 that sufficient causation existed where the actions of the accused were “a contributing cause of death, outside the *de minimis* range.” **That case demonstrates the distinctions in the degree of causation required for the different homicide offences**.
    - Therefore, an accused may be found guilty of first degree murder pursuant to s. 214(5) (now s. 231(5)) of the *Criminal Code* if the Crown has established beyond a reasonable doubt that:
        - (1) the accused was guilty of the underlying crime of domination or of attempting to commit that crime;
        - (2) the accused was guilty of the murder of the victim; 
        - (3) the accused participated in the murder in such a manner that he was a substantial cause of the death of the victim;
        - (4) there was no intervening act of another which resulted in the accused no longer being substantially connected to the death of the victim; and
        - (5) the crimes of domination and murder were part of the same transaction; that is to say, the death was caused while committing the offence of domination as part of the same series of events.

***Harbottle*** thus established a higher threshold of legal causation linked to certain words (“when the death is caused by that person”) present in some of the definitions of first degree mur der. Based on the reasoning in ***Harbottle***, this higher threshold for causation presumably **applies to first degree murder** as defined in these subsections as well. 

In the following case, the Supreme Court of Canada was asked to **extend** ***Harbottle*** **causation to second degree murder**. Although it declined to do so, in answering this question the Court chose to address the issue of how the ***Smithers*** test ought to be explained to a jury. 

!!! info "*R. v. Nette*, [2001 SCC 78](https://canlii.ca/t/51x9){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - [16] The present appeal raises the issue of causation in **second degree murder**. It requires a determination of the **threshold test of causation** that must be met before an accused may be held legally responsible for causing a victim’s death in a charge of second degree murder.
    - [50] In determining whether an accused is guilty of first or second degree murder, the **first step** for the trier of fact is to determine **whether murder has been committed**, pursuant to ss. 229 or 230 of the *Criminal Code*: ***Farrant***, [[1983] 1 SCR 124], at p. 141. Once this has been established, the **remaining question** is whether the offence should be **classified as first or second degree** murder in accordance with the criteria set out in s. 231 of the *Code*, which is, in essence, a sentencing provision. 
    - [51] This Court has previously examined the issue of causation in the homicide context in relation to **manslaughter** in ***Smithers***, *supra*, and in relation to **first degree murder** under s. 231(5) of the *Code* in ***Harbottle***, *supra*.
    - [65] It is clear from a reading of ***Harbottle*** that the “**substantial cause**” test expresses the increased degree of moral culpability, as evidenced by the accused person’s degree of participation in the killing, that is required before an accused can be found guilty under s. 231(5) of the *Criminal Code* of **first degree murder**. The increased degree of participation in the killing, coupled with a finding that the accused had the requisite *mens rea* for murder, justifies a verdict of guilty under s. 231(5) of the *Code*.
    - [70] ... I agree with **Lambert J.A.** that even if it were desirable to formulate a causation test for second degree murder that is higher than the ***Smithers*** standard for **manslaughter** but less strict than the ***Harbottle*** standard for **first degree murder** under s. 231(5), which **I conclude it is not**, it would be difficult to formulate such a test in a meaningful way and even more difficult for a jury to grasp the subtle nuances and apply three different standards of causation. 
    - [71] The causation standard expressed in ***Smithers*** is still **valid and applicable to all forms of homicide**. ... In order to explain the standard as clearly as possible to the jury, it may be preferable to phrase the standard of causation in positive terms using a phrase such as “**significant contributing cause**” rather than using expressions phrased in the negative such as “not a trivial cause” or “not insignificant.” Latin terms such as “*de minimis*” are rarely helpful. 
    - [73] In light of ***Harbottle***, ... it would make sense to instruct the jury that the acts of the accused have to have made a “**significant**” contribution to the victim’s death to trigger culpability for the homicide while, **to be guilty of first degree murder under s. 231(5)**, the accused’s actions must have been an **essential**, **substantial** and **integral part** of the killing of the victim.
    - [88] ... There is only **one standard of causation for homicide offences**, including second degree murder. That standard may be expressed using different terminology, but it remains the standard expressed by this Court in the case of ***Smithers***, *supra*. The terminology of substantial cause in ***Harbottle*** is used to indicate the increased degree of participation in the killing that is required to raise the accused’s culpability to first degree murder under s. 231(5) of the ***Code***. ***Harbottle* did not raise the standard of causation that applies to all homicide offences from the standard expressed in *Smithers*.** 

---

## Discussion Activity: Did ***R. v. Nette*** change the law?

In the Unit 3 discussion forum for this topic, please post your comments on whether the decision in ***R. v. Nette***, [2001] 3 SCR 488 changed the general test for causation that was set out in ***Smithers v. The Queen***, [1978] 1 SCR 506. 

In other words, do you agree with Justice Arbour (for the majority) or Justice L'Heureux-Dubé (concurring) in ***R. v. Nette***? If the test has changed, in your view, what are the implications of this development? You can also raise any questions that you have about establishing causation.

!!! quote "Answer"

    In ***Smithers***, the Court held that a person who assaults another must take the victim as he finds him. Although causation in civil cases differs from that in criminal law, the “thin skull” principle applies in criminal law as well as in civil law. The Court further clarified that the causation test for manslaughter is whether the accused’s act was at least a contributing cause of the victim’s death, outside the *de minimis* range, and proven beyond a reasonable doubt.

    The majority in ***Nette*** insisted that the causation standard articulated in ***Smithers*** remains valid and applicable to all forms of homicide, but suggested that the wording be slightly modified to make the standard clearer for a jury. They proposed phrasing causation in positive terms, such as “a significant contributing cause,” rather than in negative terms like “not a trivial cause” or “not insignificant.” The majority also noted that Latin expressions such as *de minimis* are rarely helpful for juries.

    With respect to elevating a homicide to first degree murder, the majority acknowledged that it would make sense to instruct the jury that the accused’s acts must have made a “significant” contribution to the victim’s death to establish culpability for homicide generally, while, to be guilty of first degree murder under s. 231(5), the accused’s actions must have been an essential, substantial, and integral part of the killing, in light of ***Harbottle***. However, this constitutes a second-stage inquiry, which only arises after causation between the accused’s conduct and the victim’s death has been established under the ***Smithers*** test.

    I agree with the minority in ***Nette***. As Justice L’Heureux-Dubé observed, there is a meaningful difference between expressing the standard as “a contributing cause that is not trivial or insignificant” and describing it as a “significant contributing cause.” Substituting the terminology of ***Smithers*** with that proposed in ***Nette*** risks altering the substance of the test. In my view, “not insignificant” may capture a relatively modest contribution, whereas “significant” suggests a much higher threshold. By changing the wording, ***Nette*** effectively raises the causation standard established in ***Smithers***.

    I also disagree with the majority’s artificial division of the causation inquiry for first degree murder into two parts: a general homicide test (the revised ***Smithers*** test) and a separate aggravated criterion requiring that the accused’s actions be an “essential, substantial and integral part” of the killing. In my view, it would be more coherent to recognize three distinct levels of causal contribution test for manslaughter, second degree murder, and first degree murder, progressing from low to high, approximately 25%, 50%, and 75% respectively, in terms of the accused’s contribution to the victim’s death.

**Actions of Third Parties and the Causation Analysis**

***Pagett v. The Queen***, (1983), 76 Cr. App. R. 279 (Court of Criminal Appeal, England) offers an interesting fact pattern that illuminates why an Accused is criminally responsible for causing the death of a person that they were using as a **human shield**. 

Other Canadian cases illustrate how an Accused can be held criminally responsible for causing a prohibited consequence because of the **actions of others**. Shoot-outs in public and street-races provide examples of such situations where the actions of the Accused act as an “**inducement**” to another person to do something that contributes to the prohibited consequence occurring. In these situations, Accused persons have been found to have been “taken to assume any **consequential risk objectively within the ambit of the danger created**”: ***R. v. Menezes*** (2002), 50 C.R. (5th) 343 (Ontario Superior Court).

In ***R. v. Maybin***, 2012 SCC 24, the Supreme Court of Canada clarified when an **intervening act** can be said to **break the chain of causation** and affirmed the “significant contributing cause” test remains pivotal to the causation analysis.

### Textbook Summary: pp 387 - 398

When there are multiple causes, the prosecution must prove that the conduct of the accused contributed to the result within the standard defined in ***Smithers*** and ***Nette***. 

A question arises, however: **Can a subsequent event sever the causational link** between the accused’s conduct and the prohibited consequence? This introduces the question of so-called intervening causes. The following cases and discussion address this question.

!!! info "*Pagett v The Queen (1983)*, 76 Cr App R 279"

    - For that man merely to be convicted of an assault would, if **the person he used as a shield were to be shot and killed**, surely be inadequate in the circumstances; we can see no reason why he should not be **convicted at least of manslaughter**.
    - In our judgment, the question **whether an accused person can be held guilty of homicide**, either murder or manslaughter, of a victim the immediate cause of whose death is the act of another person must **be determined on the ordinary principles of causation** ...
    - Furthermore, in our judgment, if a reasonable act of self-defence against the act of the accused causes the death of a third party, we can see no reason in principle why the act of self-defence, being an involuntary act caused by the act of the accused, should relieve the accused from **criminal responsibility for the death of the third party**.

In ***R v Blaue***, [1975] 1 WLR 1411 (Eng CA), the defendant stabbed an 18-year-old woman
with a knife, which penetrated her lung. She refused to have a blood transfusion on the ground that it was contrary to her religious beliefs as a Jehovah’s Witness, and she died the following day. The defendant was convicted of manslaughter. The accused’s appeal against conviction was dismissed. Lord Justice Lawton, stated in part:

> It has long been the policy of the law that those who use violence on other people must take their victims as they find them. 

> The question for decision is what caused her death. The fact that the victim refused to stop this end coming about did not break the causal connection between the act and death. 

> If a victim’s personal representatives claim compensation for his death, the concept of foreseeability can operate in favour of the wrongdoer in the assessment of such compensation: the wrongdoer is entitled to expect his victim to mitigate his damage by accepting treatment of a normal kind. 

> A policy of the common law applicable to the settlement of tortious liability between subjects may not be, and in our judgment is not, appropriate for the criminal law. 


In the following case the Supreme Court of Canada offered an approach for assessing **intervening causes** and whether a subsequent event has **severed the chain** of causation between the accused’s acts and the proscribed consequence.

!!! info "*R. v. Maybin*, [2012 SCC 24](https://canlii.ca/t/frczg){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - [1] ... An accused’s unlawful actions need **not be the only cause** of death, or even the **direct cause** of death; the court must determine if the accused’s actions are **a significant contributing cause** of death.
    - [2] This appeal raises the question of when an **intervening act** by another person **severs the causal connection** between the accused’s act and the victim’s death, thereby **absolving the accused** of legal responsibility for manslaughter. 
    - [5] ... the test for legal causation set out by this Court in ***Smithers v. The Queen***, [1978] 1 S.C.R. 506, and confirmed in ***R. v. Nette***, 2001 SCC 78, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 488: **Were the unlawful acts of the appellants a significant contributing cause of death?**
    - [11] In assessing legal causation, the majority and dissenting decisions accepted the standard set out by this Court in ***Smithers*** and confirmed in ***Nette***. The court divided, however, in its analytical approach. The majority concluded that the risk of harm, from the intervention of bar staff in an escalating bar fight, was reasonably foreseeable. The dissenting decision concluded that the assault of the bouncer was **not reasonably foreseeable** and that the intentional act of an independent person **severed legal causation**. 
    - [15] In ***Nette***, this Court affirmed the validity of the *de minimis* causation standard expressed in ***Smithers*** for culpable homicide. Writing for the majority, Arbour J. noted that **causation in homicide cases involves two aspects**: **factual** and **legal causation**. Factual causation is “an inquiry about how the victim came to his or her death, in a medical, mechanical, or physical sense, and with the contribution of the accused to that result” (***Nette***, at para. 44). **The trier of fact usually asks: “But for”** the action(s) of the accused, would the death have occurred?
    - [16] Legal causation, however, is a narrowing concept which funnels a wider range of factual causes into those which are **sufficiently connected** to a harm to warrant legal responsibility. Arbour J. noted that legal causation is “based on concepts of **moral responsibility** and is **not a mechanical or mathematical exercise**” (***Nette***, at para. 83). 
    - [28] **Neither** an unforeseeable intervening act **nor** an independent intervening act is necessarily a **sufficient condition to break the chain** of legal causation. Similarly, the fact that the intervening act was reasonably foreseeable, or was not an independent act, is not necessarily a sufficient condition to establish legal causation. ... the causation test articulated in ***Smithers*** and confirmed in ***Nette*** remains the same: **Were the dangerous, unlawful acts of the accused a significant contributing cause of the victim’s death?**





































