---
layout: post
title: L525 Unit 6
date: 2026-03-15
draft: false
categories:
  - Law
tags:
  - LAW_V 525 99C 2025W2 Canadian Criminal Law and Procedure
  - Unit 6
---

#  Defences

<!-- #### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">**Module Content**</p> -->

## 6.1 Introduction

Most defences “justify” or “excuse” behaviour that would otherwise have been considered criminal.

A common example is self-defence. A person who uses reasonable force to defend themselves against an assailant would not be found guilty of assault. **Self-defence is an example of a “true defence”** meaning that a successful Accused will be acquitted even if the Crown prosecutor proves beyond a reasonable doubt that the Accused committed the *actus reus* and *mens rea* of the offence.

Other defences are not “true defences” but instead negate the *actus reus* or *mens rea* of the offence. Examples include intoxication and NCR and these doctrines can be quite complex. In such cases, the defence prevents the Crown from proving its case, in contrast to true defences where Crown proves its case but the defence then leads to an acquittal.

<p class="highlight blue" markdown="1">**Study Tips**</p>

- Understand that some criminal defences **prevent** the Crown from proving the *actus reus* or *mens rea* of the offence. Other defences **apply after** the Crown has already proven its case. 
- For each of the defences we will study, consider: 
    - (1) at what stage does it operate? 
    - (2) what is the applicable onus/burden and standard of proof? 
    - (3) what are the essential elements of the defence? 
    - (4) are there any recognized constitutional standards or principles applicable to the defence? and 
    - (5) what is the outcome if the defence is successfully raised?

!!! note "Readings"

    - Textbook: **pp** 509-510, 512-516, 781-783, 794-796, 803-820, 837-840, 879-884, 947, 951-956, 919-920, 924-929, 930-939, 940-944

## 6.2 Mistake

**Mistake of Law**

A Mistake of Law occurs when an Accused doesn’t know that his or her actions constitute a criminal offence. S/he is unaware of the illegality of his or her conduct. 

Canadian courts do not recognize such “**ignorance of the law**” as a valid defence to criminal charges.

Ignorance of the law is **not a defence**, as codified in section 19 of the *Criminal Code*, which states:

!!! warning ""

    **s.19** Ignorance of the law by a person who commits an offence is not an excuse for committing that offence.

In other words, when establishing the *mens rea* of an offence, the Crown does NOT have to prove that the Accused knew s/he was committing an offence, or that what they were doing was illegal.

Mistakes of Law (ignorance of the law) is therefore not a defence in Canada. However, as with most things, there are a few narrow **exceptions** recognized in caselaw:

- **Non-publication:** A person may not be convicted of violating a law or regulation that has not been officially promulgated or published, it would be impossible to ascertain/comply with a law that is not yet available to the public.
- **Fault element:** There are certain rare offences that require some aspect of knowledge of the law (e.g. a legal error about who owns the property can be a defence to theft, “colour of right”). The key question here is **whether the essential element of the offence itself requires some degree of mental fault** on part of the Accused with respect to **the law or a legal right**. If so, the lack of such mental fault results in an acquittal because the Crown would not have proven the offence beyond a reasonable doubt.
- **Officially induced error:** which we will cover later in this topic

In ***R. v. Pamajewon***, [1996 CanLII 161 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fr8z){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada discusses the difference between **mistake of law**, which is not a general defence, and **mistake of fact** which can exclude criminal responsibility.

**Mistake of Fact**

Mistake of Fact occurs when an Accused is mistaken about an essential factual element of the offence. The *mens rea* of the offence must require knowledge of the mistaken fact. 

A mistake of fact therefore prevents the Crown from proving its case because **it is unable to establish the required *mens rea***. Key to this analysis is to first determine what the mental fault of the offence is, and then to ask **whether the mistake of fact would negate that mental fault**.

A series of case excerpts explain in further detail the distinction between mistake of fact and mistake of law. They demonstrate how the distinction between mistake of fact and mistake of law can be tenuous, but how it remains **a significant dividing line** in our criminal law.

### Discussion Forum: Mistake of Fact vs. Mistake of Law?

Answer EITHER of the following scenarios (be sure to identify which one you are answering):

- **Scenario #1:** The Accused is charged with assaulting a police officer (section 270(1), Criminal Code). At the time of the assault, which is admitted, the police officer was undercover and posing as a gang member in a bar. The Accused punched the police officer during a fight in the bar and did not know that the person he punched was a police officer. Is this a mistake of law or mistake of fact? Is the Accused liable? OR
- **Scenario #2:** The Accused is charged with trafficking fentanyl. He thought he had sold heroin to the undercover police officer, but it was later analysed as fentanyl by the drug lab. Both heroin and fentanyl are prohibited drugs, but fentanyl trafficking attracts a much more serious sentence than heroin trafficking. Is this a mistake of law or mistake of fact? Is the Accused liable?

**Officially Induced Error**

In ***Lévis (City) v. Tétreault; Lévis (City) v. 2629-4470 Québec inc.***, [2006 SCC 12](https://canlii.ca/t/1n0zk){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada identified **six elements** to the defence of **Officially Induced Error**:

- An **error** of law or mixed fact/law must have been made
- The Accused considered the legal **consequences** of his/her actions
- The Accused obtained **advice from an appropriate official** (someone involved in the administration of the law)
- The advice from the official was **reasonable** in the circumstances (not a high threshold)
- The advice obtained was **erroneous**
- The Accused must show that they **relied on the advice**

The Court also held that it is **for the judge to determine** if Officially Induced Error operates in a given case as an excuse (e.g. not the jury). If a claim of officially induced error succeeds, this results in **a stay of proceedings, not an acquittal**. The Accused must establish the element of officially induced error, set out above, **on a balance of probabilities**. 

Officially Induced Error may apply to both **regulatory** and **criminal** offences.

<p class="highlight blue" markdown="1">**Study Tips**</p>

- What is **Mistake of Law**? Is it a defence to criminal charges?
- What is a **Mistake of Fact**? How does it operate through *mens rea*, and what happens if it is established?
- What is the test for **Officially Induced Error** and what effect does it have on criminal charges?

## 6.3 Self-Defence

Self-defence is the justified use of force to defend oneself, one’s property, and certain third persons. It is **a statutory defence** in Canadian criminal law and there are numerous cases interpreting these provisions. Recently, however, some of these provisions were amended to expand the scope of the defence.

Self-defence is one of the most well-known defences. As noted earlier in this unit, it is a “**true defence**”, meaning that even if the Crown proves that the Accused committed the *actus reus* and *mens rea* of the offence beyond a reasonable doubt, the Accused can nevertheless be acquitted if they successfully raise self-defence.

**Introduction & The Codified Provisions**

This introduction explains the concept of self-defence and why it can be permissible for a person to use force to defend themselves. As you read these materials, think about some of the following questions:

- What are the **policy reasons** behind self-defence?
- Should self-defence **extend** only to threats to yourself? What about your property? Your children? Your partner? Your friend? Your dog? A stranger?
- Should **deadly force** in self-defence ever be permitted?
- How is self-defence different from **revenge** or being a **vigilante**?

**Air of Reality Test**

Caselaw interpreting the self-defence provisions in the former *Criminal Code* **section 34** held that self-defence should be considered (e.g. put to the jury in a jury trial or considered by the trial judge in a judge-only trial) if there is evidence that gives an “**air of reality**” to the defence, meaning:

> whether there is evidence on the record upon which a properly instructed jury acting reasonably could acquit if it believed the evidence to be true (***R. v. Cinous***, [2002 SCC 29](https://canlii.ca/t/51tb){:target=" \_blank"}, para. 92; emphasis added).

In ***Cinous***, the Supreme Court of Canada indicated that in determining whether the “air of reality test” is met, there is no assessment of credibility **at this stage** by the trial judge, **evidence must be assumed to be true**. 

However, “**mere assertions**” by the Accused that they were acting in self-defence are **insufficient**. If the Accused elaborates by testifying to specific facts that can form the basis for the evidence, then the air of reality test may be met.

If you want further explanation of the Air of Reality test in the context of self-defence, see the recent case of ***R v Mustard (G)***, [2016 MBCA 40](https://canlii.ca/t/gplth){:target=" \_blank"} at paragraphs 16 to 27 for a thorough summary.

**Statutory Provisions**

Read Sections 34 and 35 of the *Criminal Code*: Self-Defence Provisions

??? warning "an excerpt of sections 34 and 35 of the Criminal Code (it omits a few exceptions)"

    **Defence of Person**

    **Defence — use or threat of force**

    **34(1)** A person is not guilty of an offence if

    - (a) they **believe on reasonable grounds** that force is being used against them or another person or that a threat of force is being made against them or another person;
    - (b) the act that constitutes the offence is committed for the purpose of **defending or protecting** themselves or the other person from that use or threat of force; **and**
    - (c) the act committed is **reasonable** in the circumstances.

    **Factors**

    **(2)** In determining whether the act committed is reasonable in the circumstances, the court shall consider the relevant circumstances of the person, the other parties and the act, including, but not limited to, the following factors:

    - (a) the nature of the force or threat;
    - (b) the extent to which the use of force was imminent and whether there were other means available to respond to the potential use of force;
    - (c) the person’s role in the incident;
    - (d) whether any party to the incident used or threatened to use a weapon;
    - (e) the size, age, gender and physical capabilities of the parties to the incident;
    - (f) the nature, duration and history of any relationship between the parties to the incident, including any prior use or threat of force and the nature of that force or threat;
    - (f.1) any history of interaction or communication between the parties to the incident;
    - (g) the nature and proportionality of the person’s response to the use or threat of force; and
    - (h) whether the act committed was in response to a use or threat of force that the person knew was lawful.

    **Defence of Property**

    **Defence - property**

    **35(1)** A person is not guilty of an offence if

    - (a) they either believe on reasonable grounds that they are **in peaceable possession of property** or are acting under the authority of, or lawfully assisting, a person whom they believe on reasonable grounds is in peaceable possession of property;
    - (b) they believe on reasonable grounds that another person
        - (i) is about to enter, is entering or has entered the property without being entitled by law to do so,
        - (ii) is about to take the property, is doing so or has just done so, or
        - (iii) is about to damage or destroy the property, or make it inoperative, or is doing so;
    - (c) the act that constitutes the offence is **committed for the purpose of**
        - (i) preventing the other person from entering the property, or removing that person from the property, or
        - (ii) preventing the other person from taking, damaging or destroying the property or from making it inoperative, or retaking the property from that person; **and**
    - (d) the act committed is **reasonable in the circumstances**.

### Discussion Activity: Subjectivity/Objectivity in s.34

Please post a message in the Unit 6 discussion forum indicating whether you think the factors in s.34(1), s.34(2) and s.35(1) should be considered objectively and/or subjectively by a court.

### Discussion Forum: Self-Defence Practice Problem

Please post a message in the Unit 6 discussion forum for this topic addressing whether the woman in the following factual scenario could successfully argue self-defence under the section 34 of the Criminal Code, and the reasons for your conclusion:

> A 20-year old woman is walking through a parking lot at midnight. There is a parking attendant in a booth some 100 metres away. A man approaches and says: “Give me your purse, or else!” She reaches into a pocket and uses a taser on him once for 30 seconds in duration. He dies. She is charged with second-degree murder and possession of a prohibited weapon (i.e. the taser).

<p class="highlight blue" markdown="1">**Study Tips**</p>

- Be prepared to list and discuss the **factors a court will consider when evaluating a claim of self-defence**.  Know whether these factors are applied subjectively and/or objectively. 
- Be able to explain **Air of Reality** test and know when and how it is used in the context of self-defence.
- Is self-defence a “**true defence**”?  Can it still apply if the Crown has otherwise proven its case?

## 6.4 Necessity

Necessity involves urgent circumstances of clear and imminent peril where the Accused has no safe and legal avenue of escape. They **break the law out of necessity** and are subsequently excused from criminal liability.

This brief introduction explains the concept of necessity, which is **a controversial defence** that has only been recognized in Canada since a 1984 decision of the Supreme Court of Canada. There is **no statutory provision** in the *Criminal Code* recognizing necessity as it is **a purely common law defence**.  Consider why necessity is controversial and the reasons for why it is now a valid defence.

In ***Perka v. The Queen***, [1984 CanLII 23 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1lpfj){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada recognized necessity as a defence for the first time. The **essential elements** of necessity can be summarized from this decision as follows:

- **Urgency:** “at a minimum the situation must be so emergent and the peril so pressing that normal human instincts cry out for action and make a counsel of patience unreasonable”
- **No legal way out:** it must be “demonstrably impossible” to avoid the peril or prevent the harm without breaking the law
- **Proportionality:** the harm avoided must **exceed** the harm caused by the Accused to avoid it

The first two factors, (1) urgency and (2) lack of legal alternative are applied **subjectively** AND on **a modified objective standard**. The third factor (3) proportionality is applied on **a purely objective** standard. Recall:

- **Subjective Test**: What did this Accused actually himself think at the time?
- **Objective Test**: What would a reasonable person have thought (and/or done) at the time?  This requires the judge to set the standard of what "reasonable people" think and do in given situations.
- **Modified Objective Test**: What would a reasonable person have thought (and/or done) at the time, **if that person had the same knowledge, background, perceptions and capabilities as our Accused?**  This standard is also determined by the judge and straddles the middle ground between the subjective and objective tests.

Interestingly, in ***Perka***, Justice Dickson (as he then was) found that “**negligence or involvement in criminal or immoral activity does not disentitle the actor to the excuse of necessity**”. This could present a **controversial** set of circumstances, as seen in the following Discussion Activity.

### Discussion Activity: Necessity Practice Problems

In the Unit 6 discussion forum for Necessity, please post a message responding to any ONE of the following factual scenarios along with your reasons:

- **Scenario #1:** Would a bank robber who is shot be entitled to claim necessity as a defence to breaking into a home and stealing a first aid kit? Why or why not? How do your answer accord with ***Perka***?

- **Scenario #2:** The Accused went to a house to retrieve what he believed was his “stolen” keg of beer but the ownership was “hotly contested”. Threatening calls had been exchanged between the Accused and the person in possession of the keg before the Accused arrived at the house. On arrival at the house, some 20-40 people surrounded the Accused’s car and as he backed out, the accused injured two of them. The Accused was charged with dangerous operation of a motor vehicle. Can the Accused claim necessity?

- **Scenario #3:** The Accused was depressed, lived in the forest and had a habit of fasting. He crawled to town in the winter, believing that he was facing starvation and hypothermia. He found an unoccupied townhouse that he broke into and ate food from inside the refrigerator. The Accused then fell unconscious on the floor. He was charged with break and enter and mischief. Can the Accused claim necessity?

<p class="highlight blue" markdown="1">**Study Tips**</p>

- Create a framework for how you would apply the necessity test from ***Perka*** to a given fact pattern. What are the 3 main factors a court should consider? What does the court in ***Perka*** say about those factors and how they should be assessed?
- Know whether the 3 factors should be applied subjectively, objectively, and/or by using a modified objective standard. Be clear on how these differing standards are applied.
 
## 6.5 Duress

Duress is a similar defence to necessity, except in the case of duress, **the threat or compulsion comes from another person as opposed to circumstances**. Duress is more complex, however, because it has a different statutory and common law manifestation **depending on whether the Accused is a principal offender or a party**. The statutory defence of duress also raises constitutional issues.

**Duress in Statute**

This brief introduction explains the defence of duress, which is both a statutory defence and a common law defence. It is also a defence that the Accused must raise an “**air of reality**” in order for it to be considered.

**Section 17** of the *Criminal Code* states the following:

!!! warning ""

    A person who commits an offence

    - under **compulsion** by threats of immediate death or bodily harm
    - from a person who is **present** when the offence is committed

    is excused for committing the offence if

    - the person **believes** that the threats will be carried out and
    - if the person is **not a party to a conspiracy or association** whereby the person is subject to compulsion,

    but this section **does not apply** where the offence that is committed is high treason or treason, murder, piracy, attempted murder, sexual assault, sexual assault with a weapon, threats to a third party or causing bodily harm, aggravated sexual assault, forcible abduction, hostage taking, robbery, assault with a weapon or causing bodily harm, aggravated assault, unlawfully causing bodily harm, arson or an offence under sections 280 to 283 (abduction and detention of young persons).

Section 17 of the *Criminal Code* applies only to **principal offenders** (see ***Paquette v. R.***, [1976 CanLII 24 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1tx25){:target=" \_blank"}), whereas parties to an offence (e.g. aiders and abettors, common intenders) can only claim duress as a common law defence. According to ***R. v. Hibbert***, [1995 CanLII 110 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1frjf){:target=" \_blank"}, duress does not negate *mens rea*, but may result in a finding of **moral involuntariness that operates as a defence**.

**Constitutional Issues**

In ***R. v. Ruzic***, [2001 SCC 24](https://canlii.ca/t/520x){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada considered a constitutional challenge under section 7 of the *Charter* to the statutory defence of duress in **section 17** of the *Criminal Code*. The Court held that it is unjust to penalize a person who acted in a morally involuntary fashion because his acts cannot be reasonably attributed to him, his will was constrained by another force. 

The Court held that the “**immediacy**” and “**presence**” requirements for duress under section 17 of the *Criminal Code* infringed section 7 of the *Charter*.

As a result of ***Ruzic***, section 17 of the *Criminal Code* effectively **reads as follows** for principal offenders seeking to claim duress. We call this “reading down” a section.

!!! warning ""

    A person who commits an offence

    - under compulsion by threats of ~~immediate~~ death or bodily harm
    - ~~from a person who is present when the offence is committed~~

Note that this is very similar to the common law defence of necessity in ***Perka***, considered in the last topic.

**Duress at Common Law**

As with ***Perka***, each element of the common law defence of duress must be both **subjectively** held by the Accused AND found to be **objectively reasonable**. One must therefore consider the elements of the test twice (once subjectively and once objectively) when applying it to a given fact pattern.

The B.C. Supreme Court explained the **common law test for duress** as follows in ***R. v. Poon and Wong***, [2006 BCSC 1158](https://canlii.ca/t/1p2zh){:target=" \_blank"}:

!!! info ""

    [3] In ***R. v. Cinous***, [2002 SCC 29](https://canlii.ca/t/51tb){:target=" \_blank"} at para. 60, the Court articulated this test as follows:

    > **[T]he trial judge must determine** if the evidence put forward is such that, if believed, a reasonable jury properly charged could have acquitted.

    > **The onus then shifts to the Crown to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused was not acting under duress.**

    [4]  The elements of **the defence of duress** are set out in ***Ruzic*** as follows:  
    
    - (1) the accused acts solely as a result of **threats** of death, or serious bodily harm to him or herself or another person; 
    - (2) the threats were of such **gravity or seriousness** that the accused person believed that the threats would be carried out; 
    - (3) the threats were of such gravity that they might well have caused **a reasonable person**, placed in the same situation as the accused, **to act in the same manner** as he or she did; in other words, would a person of reasonable firmness, sharing the characteristics of the accused, such as his or her age and his or her background, have responded to the threats; and 
    - (4) the accused must **not have had an obvious safe avenue of escape**.

    [5]  The Supreme Court of Canada added that in future trial judges should instruct the jury on the components of this defence and the need for a close temporal connection between the threat and the harm threatened.  The jury’s attention should also be drawn to the need for the application of an objective/subjective assessment of the safe avenue of escape test.  A jury must assess the defence and in particular the safe avenue of escape requirement on a modified objective or subjective/ objective analysis.  That means that they should decide how a reasonable person, taking into account the personal circumstances, background and essential character of the accused, would have perceived the situation.  **The accused is not required to seek the protection of the police in every circumstance.**

    [6]  Subsequent cases have emphasized the need for the jury to assess the proportionality of the accused’s response, again, on a subjective/objective analysis, and the requirement for the accused to show **reasonable fortitude in resisting the threats**: ***R. v. Williams***, [2002 BCCA 453](https://canlii.ca/t/58kq){:target=" \_blank"}.

    [7]  A recognized exception to the defence of duress was considered in ***R. v. Li***, [2002 CanLII 18077 (ON CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/1dtk6){:target=" \_blank"}.  Li stands for the proposition that **voluntary involvement in criminal activity negates both the common law and statutory defence of duress**.

Duress operates as a **true defence**. As touched on in the above passage, Crown must first prove that the Accused committed the underlying offence. The Accused may then assert duress based on evidence presented in either the Crown or the Defence case at trial. If there is an **air of reality** to the assertion, the **defence of duress will be put to the jury**, and the **onus of proof will shift back to the Crown** to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the Accused was not acting under duress.

**Comparing Both Forms of Duress**

In ***R. v. Ryan***, [2013 SCC 3](https://canlii.ca/t/fvp4h){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada further explained and applied the defence of duress. It discussed the **similarities and differences between the statutory and the common law defences of duress**, which the majority of the Court summarized as follows:

!!! info ""

    [81] The defence of duress, in its statutory and common law forms, is largely the same.  The two forms share the following **common elements**:

    - There must be **an explicit or implicit threat** of present or future death or bodily harm. This threat can be directed at the accused or a third party.
    - The accused must **reasonably believe** that the threat will be carried out.
    - There is **no safe avenue of escape**. This element is evaluated on a modified objective standard.
    - A **close temporal connection** between the threat and the harm threatened.
    - **Proportionality** between the harm threatened and the harm inflicted by the accused. The harm caused by the accused must **be equal to or no greater** than the harm threatened. This is also evaluated on a modified objective standard.
    - The accused is **not a party to a conspiracy or association** whereby the accused is subject to compulsion and actually knew that threats and coercion to commit an offence were a possible result of this criminal activity, conspiracy or association.

    [82] Certain **differences** remain. 

    [83] The **first** is that, as was established in ***Paquette*** and confirmed in ***Ruzic***, **the statutory defence applies to principals, while the common law defence is available to parties to an offence**. The **second** is that the statutory version of the defence has a lengthy list of **exclusions**, whereas it is **unclear** in the Canadian common law of duress whether any offences are excluded. This results in the rather incoherent situation that principals who commit one of the enumerated offences cannot rely on the defence of duress while parties to those same offences, however, can.
 

### Discussion Activity: Excluded Offence for Statutory Defence of Duress

Please post a message in the Unit 6 discussion forum for this topic explaining which, if any, of the excluded offences in section 17 of the *Criminal Code* may violate section 7 of the *Charter* and why.

<p class="highlight blue" markdown="1">**Study Tips**</p>

- In what circumstances does *Criminal Code* s 17, **the statutory form of duress**, apply? In what circumstances does the **common law doctrine of duress** apply? What is the main **difference** between the two?
- Go through the reading materials for this unit and outline the test you would apply for (1) statutory and (2) common law duress. Note what the cases say about **how to evaluate the different factors**. Know whether you would apply each factor subjectively, objectively or both.
- Be clear about how duress operates in a legal sense. Does it prevent the Crown from proving its case (the **actus reus** and/or **mens rea**) or is it a true defence? Who has the burden of proving (or disproving) the duress?

## 6.6 Intoxication

There are two types of intoxication for our purposes: **involuntary** and **voluntary** (self-induced).

Involuntary intoxication can **negate** an Accused's *mens rea* or make their actions **physically involuntary**.  For example, if someone slips a drug into your drink at a coffee shop and you suddenly lose consciousness while driving home and hit a pedestrian, you would argue involuntary intoxication as a defence to any resulting charges.  **The defence of involuntary intoxication can be applied to any charges.**

**Self-induced intoxication** is a controversial potential defence that **only applies in certain circumstances**. We will focus on self-induced intoxication in this topic, which is a mixture of **statutory provisions** and **common law** decisions.

**Self-Induced Intoxication**

In the House of Lords case of ***D.P.P. v. Beard***, [1920] A.C. 479, the historic approach to self-induced intoxication is described, including recognition that **a person can be so intoxicated that they are unable to form the "specific intent"** required to commit certain offences.

From the case of ***R. v. Daley***, [2007 SCC 53](https://canlii.ca/t/1v5dr){:target=" \_blank"} which we will read later in this Topic:

> [35] Courts in England and Canada have taken the reference in ***Beard*** to "forming the specific intent essential to constitute the crime" as drawing a distinction between crimes of specific intent and those of general intent, such that the **defence of intoxication is traditionally only available with respect to the former**.  **Specific intent offences** require the mind to focus on an objective further to the immediate one at hand, while **general intent offences** require only a conscious doing of the prohibited act

**Specific intent crimes** are those where the Accused specifically intends the result. For example, murder is a specific intent offence because it requires, among other elements, proof beyond a reasonable doubt that the Accused intended to kill his victim (the intended result).

**General intent crimes**, on the other hand, require only that the Accused intended to do the *actus reus* itself.  S/he does not need to intend what results from the act, such as death in the case of manslaughter.

**Self-induced intoxication** can prevent the Crown from establishing the requisite *mens rea* **in specific intent offences**.  For general intent crimes, self-induced intoxication may be used as a defence **only if** the offence does NOT include "as an element an assault or any other interference or threat of interference by a person with the bodily integrity of another person," per s.33.1 of the *Criminal Code*.

!!! warning "Section 33.1 of the *Criminal Code*"
    
    **Offences of violence by negligence**

    33.1 (1) A person who, by reason of **self-induced extreme intoxication**, lacks the general intent or voluntariness ordinarily required to commit an offence referred to in subsection (3), **nonetheless commits the offence** if

    - (a) all the other elements of the offence are present; **and**

    - (b) before they were in **a state of extreme intoxication**, they **departed markedly from the standard of care** expected of a reasonable person in the circumstances with respect to the consumption of intoxicating substances.

    **Marked departure — foreseeability of risk and other circumstances**

    (2) For the purposes of determining whether the person departed markedly from the standard of care, the court must consider the **objective foreseeability of the risk** that the consumption of the intoxicating substances could cause extreme intoxication **and** lead the person to harm another person. The court must, in making the determination, also consider all relevant circumstances, including anything that the person did to avoid the risk.

    **Offences**

    (3) This section applies in respect of an offence under this Act or any other Act of Parliament that includes as an element an assault or any other interference or threat of interference by a person with the bodily integrity of another person.

    **Definition of extreme intoxication**

    (4) In this section, **extreme intoxication** means intoxication that renders a person **unaware** of, or **incapable** of consciously controlling, their behaviour.

Section 33.1 is a key statutory provision that limits the availability of the defence of self-induced intoxication for general intent offences involving threats or acts of violence.

In the leading case of ***R. v. Daley***, [2007 SCC 53](https://canlii.ca/t/1v5dr){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada sets out the current scope of the defence of self-induced intoxication, including the **three legally relevant levels** of intoxication and their application to specific versus general intent offences.

!!! info "*R. v. Daley*, [2007 SCC 53](https://canlii.ca/t/1v5dr){:target=" \_blank"}, headnote (edited, with emphasis)"

    - On the current state of the law, for **a murder charge**, the defence of intoxication will only be available to **negate specific intent so as to reduce the charge to manslaughter**.  There are three legally relevant degrees of intoxication. 
    - First, there is **mild drunkenness**, which induces relaxation of both inhibitions and socially acceptable behaviour.  This has **never been accepted as a factor** in determining whether the accused possessed the requisite *mens rea* and the trial judge is not required to give any instruction on mild intoxication.
    - Second, there is **advanced intoxication**, i.e. intoxication to the point where the accused lacks the specific intent, to the extent of an impairment of the accused's foresight of the consequences of his or her act **sufficient to raise a reasonable doubt** about the requisite *mens rea*.  A defence based on this level of intoxication applies only to specific intent offences and the extent of intoxication required to advance it successfully may vary, depending on the type of offence involved. 
    - Third, there is **extreme intoxication** akin to automatism, which **negates voluntariness** and thus is a complete defence to criminal responsibility, but such a defence would be extremely rare and, by operation of s. 33.1  of the *Criminal Code*, **limited to non violent types of offences**.  [40 44]

Note that intoxication is **not** a "**true defence**" so to speak. Rather, its successful assertion will prevent Crown from proving the requisite *actus reus* (voluntariness) and/or *mens rea* (guilty state of mind) beyond a reasonable doubt.

<p class="highlight blue" markdown="1">**Study Tips**</p>

- What is the difference between involuntary and voluntary (self-induced) intoxication?
- Is self-induced intoxication a true defence? How does it affect Crown‘s ability to prove the *actus reus* or *mens rea* of a crime?
- Be able to explain the difference between specific intent offences and general intent
- What are the three levels of intoxication as set out in ***R. v Daley***? Does each level apply to both specific intent and general intent offences?
- Be familiar with s.33.1 of the ***Criminal Code*** and how it limits the defence of self-induced intoxication.

## 6.7 Mental Disorder

Mental disorder is a complex issue for the criminal law to address. One of the most controversial aspects of this defence is the **jury verdict** of “**Not Criminally Responsible on Account of Mental Disorder**” (“NCR”). 

An Accused who is deemed NCR is neither found **guilty** nor **acquitted**. Instead of being criminally sanctioned, the offender must receive **mental health treatment** in a secure facility and can only be released based on a process set out in the *Criminal Code*, which is related to their level of risk.

!!! warning "Section 16 of the *Criminal Code*"

    **Defence of mental disorder**

    16(1) No person is criminally responsible for an act committed or an omission made while suffering from **a mental disorder** that rendered the person **incapable of appreciating the nature and quality of the act or omission or of knowing that it was wrong**.

    **Presumption**

    (2) Every person is presumed not to suffer from a mental disorder so as to be exempt from criminal responsibility by virtue of subsection (1), until the contrary is proved **on the balance of probabilities**.

    **Burden of proof**

    (3) The burden of proof that an accused was suffering from a mental disorder so as to be exempt from criminal responsibility is **on the party that raises the issue**.

Mental disorder may affect Crown’s ability to prove the mental fault element of an offence, or to establish physical voluntariness. However, as noted above, it is **not a true “defence”**. The result of a successful mental disorder claim is a verdict of NCR.

Part XX.1 of the *Criminal Code*, added in 1991, set out that an NCR individual is to be **held in detention** in a secure facility with psychiatric treatment. A Review Board would then determine when release of such an individual is appropriate.

Note that NCR can be raised by either the **Crown Prosecutor** OR **Defence Counsel**. In some instances, Defence Counsel will not want their client found NCR because it could mean a longer period of detention in a psychiatric facility than they would spend in regular jail. In some cases, the Crown Prosecutor and Defence Counsel may agree that NCR is the right disposition and make this recommendation to the judge. A jury can also be instructed that NCR is a potential verdict open to them, so long as there is a sufficient evidentiary basis.

We will now turn to case law which interprets the key concepts cited in section 16, including:

- disease of the mind
- appreciating the nature and quality of the act or omission; and
- knowing that the act is wrong

**Disease of the Mind**

Section 2 of the *Criminal Code* defines “mental disorder” as a “disease of the mind”, preserving the common law definition that developed through case law. 

In ***Regina v. Simpson***, [1977 CanLII 1142 (ON CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/g1dvj){:target=" \_blank"}, the Ontario Court of Appeal found that it is f**or the judge to determine** whether something is a disease of the mind or not. **The key question** for the judge is that while the existence of a disease of the mind is a necessary condition, it must operate to an extent that it renders the Accused either (a) incapable of appreciating the nature and quality of the act/omission, or (b) that it is wrong. This decision also found that personality disorders or psychopathic personalities are capable of constituting disease of the mind.

In ***Cooper v. R.***, [1979 CanLII 63 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1tx9m){:target=" \_blank"}, Justice Dickson (as he then was) held that:

> Disease of the mind embraces illness, disorder or abnormal condition which impairs the human mind and its functioning, excluding however, self-induced states caused by alcohol or drugs, as well as transitory mental states such as hysteria or concussion... **the disease must be of such intensity as to render accused incapable of appreciating nature/quality of act or knowing it is wrong**.”

**Appreciating the nature and quality of the act or omission**

Section 16 of the *Criminal Code* provides that a person suffering from a mental disorder will be found NCR if either it rendered them incapable of (a) appreciating the nature and quality of the act or omission or (b) of knowing that it was wrong. We explore the “first branch” (a) here.

In this additional excerpt from ***Cooper v. R.***, Justice Dickson (as he then was) discusses what is meant in section 16 of the *Criminal Code* by the term “appreciating the nature and quality of the act”. The question, he held, is:

> Was the accused person at the very time of the offence by reason of disease of the mind unable to fully appreciate not only the **nature and quality of the act** but the **natural consequences that would flow** from it? Was the accused person deprived of the mental capacity to **foresee and measure the consequences of the act**” (emphasis added).

Justice Dickson noted that section 16 speaks of “**appreciating**”, rather than the old common law defence of insanity that was about “**knowing**”, the nature and quality of the act. This means that **NCR is broader in scope than the old common law defence** of insanity.

As noted in the notes after ***Cooper***, in ***Simpson***, Justice Martin held that

> merely lack[ing] appropriate feelings for the victim of remorse or guilt for what he has done, even though such lack may stem from a disease of the mind, does not suffice. Indeed, the absence of such feelings is common of many people who engage in repeated and serious criminal conduct.

In ***R. v. Abbey***, [1982 CanLII 25 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1lpcd){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada held that an Accused who does not “appreciate the penal consequences of his actions” does not, by reason of that finding, fail to appreciate the nature and quality of the act under section 16 of the *Criminal Code*.

**Knowing that the Act is Wrong**

As noted earlier, Section 16 of the *Criminal Code* provides that a person suffering from a mental disorder will be found NCR if either it rendered them incapable of (a) appreciating the nature and quality of the act or omission or (b) of knowing that it was wrong. We explore the “second branch” (b) here.

In ***R. v. Chaulk***, [1990 CanLII 34 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fspm){:target=" \_blank"}, Chief Justice Lamer held that a person suffering from a mental disorder at the time of the offence “will only be convicted if he commits an act which he know he **ought not to do** and which is contrary to law”. In dissent, however, Justice McLachlin (as she then was) found that all that is required is that the Accused be capable of knowing that the act was “in some sense wrong”. She equated wrong with knowledge by the Accused that the act was “ought not to do”.

In ***R. v. Oommen***, [1994 CanLII 101 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1frs9){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada revisited the interpretation of the word “wrong” in section 16 of the *Criminal Code* and overrode the decision in ***R. v. Chaulk***.  Justice McLachlin (as she then was) held that the test is

> whether the accused lacks the capacity to **rationally decide whether the act is right or wrong** and hence to make a rational choice about whether to do it or not.

### Discussion Activity: Mental Disorder Practice Problem

Please post a message in the Unit 6 discussion forum analysing whether the Accused in the following factual scenario meets the NCR definition of section 16 of the *Criminal Code*, citing any relevant jurisprudence:

!!! info ""

    The accused suffered a sudden series of religious delusions, and ultimately believed that God wanted him to kill his daughter and that if he did not do so he would be required by God to kill his entire family. The accused brutally stabbed his daughter causing her death, and then went to his church to pray where he quickly realized that God had not wanted him to kill his daughter. He had displayed strange and irrational behaviour both shortly before the murder and for a number of days after the murder and his arrest. Two psychiatrists agreed that the accused suffered from bipolar mood disorder and that he was in a hypomanic state at the time of the homicide; the court found this evidence credible.

**2014 Amendments to the NCR Regime**

**Bill C-14:** An Act to amend the *Criminal Code* and the *National Defence Act* (mental disorder) received Royal Assent on April 11, 2014 and made a number of changes to the NCR regime. It did not, however, amend section 16 of the *Criminal Code*, which we’ve studied above.

This summary of Bill C-14 describes the main changes to the *Criminal Code* provisions dealing with people found to be NCR. It provides a “statutory framework that governs the treatment of accused who are declared unfit to stand trial or not criminally responsible on account of mental disorder.” Of particular note:

!!! info ""

    - S.16 of the *Code* sets out the **presumption** that everyone is free from mental disorder
    - The party to proceeding who claims otherwise [NCR] has the burden of proving, **on a balance of probabilities**, that at the time of the offence the accused was suffering from a mental disorder and is so exempt from criminal responsibility
    - A court may order that the mental condition of the accused be **assessed**
    - Where there is a verdict of not criminally responsible on account of mental disorder, the court may... hold a disposition **hearing** to determine what is to be done with the accused” or the matter goes to a **Review Board**
    - The court or Review Board may 
        - (1) discharge the accused absolutely if... not a significant threat to the safety of the public, 
        - (2) discharge the accused with conditions, or 
        - (3) direct that the accused be detained in custody in a hospital
    - Every disposition made by the Review Board must be **reviewed annually** by the Board until the accused is discharged absolutely

<p class="highlight blue" markdown="1">**Study Tips**</p>

- What is NCR? Who raises it and who has the burden of proving it? To what standard of proof must it be proven?
- Is NCR a true criminal offence? How does it operate?
- Using *Criminal Code* s 16 as a guide, map out what test you would apply to determine if someone was NCR? Know how to apply the different components of s.16.
- What happens after an NCR finding is made?

## Quiz

## Summary

## Textbook Summary: pp 509-510, 512-516, 781-783, 794-796, 803-820, 837-840, 879-884, 919-920, 924-929, 930-939, 940-944, 947, 951-956

**Chapter 8 IGNORANCE OF THE LAW**

**Section 19** of the *Criminal Code* provides:

> Ignorance of the law by a person who commits an offence is **not an excuse** for committing that offence.

Distinction between the accused’s **mistaken belief about the facts**, a factor that is relevant to the proof of fault, and the accused’s **mistaken belief about the law**, a factor that under s 19 of the *Criminal Code* is not an excuse for committing the offence.

A mistake of fact may often provide the accused with a **viable defence** that prevents the Crown from proving *mens rea*, whereas a mistake of law is only rarely a defence. 

An exception to the principle that ignorance of the law is not an excuse, namely, the defence of **officially induced error**. The Supreme Court of Canada has recognized the legitimacy of this defence, albeit as one that the accused must establish **on a balance of probabilities** and that, if successful, results in **a stay of proceedings as opposed to an acquittal**.

**I. MISTAKEN BELIEFS ABOUT THE LAW AND PARTICULAR FAULT ELEMENTS**

!!! info "*Regina v. Howson*, [1966 CanLII 285 (ON CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/g12m7){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - An employee of a towing service was charged with theft of a car when he refused to give a towed car back to its owner until the owner paid certain expenses. He was convicted at trial and appealed.
    - **Section 19 only applies when there is an offence**. There is no offence **if there is colour of right**. The real question here is whether the accused had, under the circumstances, **a colour of right sufficient to justify his refusal to release the vehicle**. If not, upon the facts of this case, he would be guilty of theft. 
    - I think it is clear from this evidence that the Magistrate misdirected himself by failing to consider the question of colour of right. From what he said after the conviction, **it was obvious that he did not believe that the accused was trying or intending to steal the car**. Under these circumstances he should, I think, have **acquitted the accused**.

!!! info "*R. v. Jones*, [1991 CanLII 31 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fshw){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - The accused, however, purported to renounce the **jurisdiction** of the federal and provincial governments in relation to **gaming on reserves** and to issue their **own licences** for operating bingos. The accused were convicted at trial and their appeal to the Ontario Court of Appeal was dismissed. They appealed to the Supreme Court of Canada.
    - They argued that **mistake of fact** is a constitutionally mandated defence to criminal charges. Even assuming that proposition is correct, it can only apply to the facts which constitute the offence. There is **no** suggestion of any mistake relating to those facts here; the **mistake is in believing that the law does not apply because it is inoperative on reserves**. 
    - Section 19 of the *Code* expresses the long-recognized principle that a mistake about the law is no defence to a charge of breaching it. No attack was made on the validity of that section. The argument here is that this legal mistake should be characterized as a mistake of fact and **I find it impossible to characterize the mistaken belief put forward here as embracing any mistake of fact**.

**II. MISTAKE OF FACT AND MISTAKE OF LAW**

In ***R. v. Prue***, [1979 CanLII 227 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1z787){:target=" \_blank"}, the majority of the Supreme Court of Canada held that an accused’s lack of knowledge that his licence had been automatically suspended under provincial law after a driving offence was a “**question of fact**” and not of law when the accused was charged under s 238 with driving while his licence was suspended (see now **s 259(4)**).

However, in the Supreme Court’s key case exploring this point, ***R. v. Barton***, [2019 SCC 33](https://canlii.ca/t/j0fqj){:target=" \_blank"}, **Moldaver J** observed the following:

!!! info "*R. v. Barton*, [2019 SCC 33](https://canlii.ca/t/j0fqj){:target=" \_blank"}"

    [95] **A mistake of fact defence** operates where the accused mistakenly perceived facts that negate, or raise a reasonable doubt about, the fault element of the offence (see ***Pappa-john v. The Queen***, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 120, at p. 148, per Dickson J. (dissenting, but not on this point)). **Honest but mistaken belief in communicated consent falls within this category of defences** (see ***Ewanchuk***, at paras. 42-43; J.A., at para. 48). 

    [96] But the law draws a distinction between mistakes of fact and mistakes of law. As a general rule, the latter offer no excuse (see *Code*, s. 19; ***R. v. Forster***, [1992] 1 S.C.R. 339, at p. 346; ***R. v. MacDonald***, 2014 SCC 3, [2014] 1 S.R.C. 37, at para. 58). As the Court of Appeal in this case put it, “[n]o one in this country is entitled to their own law” (para. 245). Therefore, to the extent an accused’s **defence of honest but mistaken belief in communicated consent rests on a mistake of law**, including “what counts as consent” from a legal perspective, rather than a mistake of fact, **the defence is of no avail** (see ***Stewart***, at § 3:600.30.10).

**III. THE DEFENCE OF OFFICIALLY INDUCED ERROR**

!!! info "*Lévis (City) v. Tétreault; Lévis (City) v. 2629-4470 Québec inc.*, [2006 SCC 12](https://canlii.ca/t/1n0zk){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - [In this case, the Supreme Court of Canada unanimously recognized, for the first time, that **officially induced error is available as a defence** in Canadian criminal law. **Justice LeBel**, for the Court, adopted **the framework for the defence of officially induced error** as set out by **Lamer CJC** in ***R v Jorgensen***, [1995] 4 SCR 55. ... is a strong indication that the defence **applies to true crimes as well**.]
    - [24] In Lamer C.J.’s view, this defence constituted a limited but **necessary exception** to the rule that ignorance of the law cannot excuse the commission of a criminal offence: 

        > **Officially induced error of law exists as an exception** to the rule that ignorance of the law does not excuse. ... the complexity of contemporary regulation makes the assumption that a responsible citizen will have a comprehensive knowledge of the law unreasonable. 

    - [26] After his analysis of the case law, **Lamer C.J.** defined the constituent elements of the defence and the conditions under which it will be available. In his view, the accused must prove **six elements**:

        - (1) that **an error** of law or of mixed law and fact was made;
        - (2) that the person who committed the act **considered** the legal consequences of his or her actions;
        - (3) that the **advice obtained came from an appropriate official**;
        - (4) that the advice was **reasonable**; 
        - (5) that the advice was **erroneous**; and 
        - (6) that the person **relied** on the advice in committing the act (***Jorgensen***, at paras. 28-35).

    - [27] ... It should be noted, as the Ontario Court of Appeal has done, that it is necessary to establish the **objective reasonableness not only of the advice, but also of the reliance on the advice** (***R. v. Cancoil Thermal Corp.*** (1986), 27 C.C.C. (3d) 295 (Ont. C.A.); ***Cranbrook Swine*** [2003 CanLII 41182 (Ont CA)]).

There are at least two questions that should be posed with regard to ***Lévis*** and ***Jorgensen***, [1995] 4 SCR 55. 

- **First**, is it appropriate to analogize officially induced error to entrapment and therefore conclude that the proper remedy in the case of officially induced error is **a stay of proceedings** rather than **an acquittal**? In the case of officially induced error, the accused has operated in a morally appropriate fashion and deserves to have the error treated as “an excuse,” resulting in an acquittal. 
- **Second**, should the accused always have the burden of establishing the defence of officially induced error on a balance of probabilities? But where the offence is a criminal offence with a presumption of subjective *mens rea*, as in ***Jorgensen***, it should not be automatically assumed that the burden of proof is on the accused on a balance of probabilities. 

**Chapter 15 MENTAL DISORDER AND AUTOMATISM**

**I. INTRODUCTION**

Traditionally the mental disorder defence was rarely raised in proceedings, because the consequence of its acceptance was automatic indefinite detention. Such detention was found by the Supreme Court of Canada in ***R. v. Swain***, [1991 CanLII 104 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fsks){:target=" \_blank"} to be an unjustified violation of ss 7 and 9 of the *Charter of Rights and Freedoms*. Parliament responded to ***Swain*** by amending the *Criminal Code* in relation to the disposition of an accused.

The core of the defence still turns on the presence of a disease of the mind with **two possible branches** of cognitive effects: **incapacity to appreciate the nature and consequences of the act**, or **to know that the act was wrong**.

**III. MENTAL DISORDER AS A DEFENCE**

Note that **mental disorder** is defined in s 2 of the *Criminal Code* as **a disease of the mind**, preserving the pre-1992 jurisprudence on this issue.

**A. MENTAL DISORDER OR DISEASE OF THE MIND**

!!! info "***Cooper v. R.***, [1979 CanLII 63 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1tx9m){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - But the legal position, as I understand it, is properly expressed in the following passage (at pp. 349-50):

        > The term “**disease of the mind**” is a legal concept, although it includes a medical component, and what is meant by that term is **a question of law for the judge**. ... It is the function of the psychiatrist to describe the accused’s mental condition and how it is considered from the medical point of view. It is for the judge to decide whether the condition described is comprehended by the term “disease of the mind.”

    - What is interesting in these two cases for our purposes is the maintenance of a clear **distinction** between the **weight to be given medical opinions expressed in evidence**, however relevant, and **the task of the trial judge to form an independent conclusion** as to whether the mental condition falls within the legal concept. 
    - In summary, one might say that in a legal sense “disease of the mind” embraces any illness, disorder or abnormal condition which impairs the human mind and its functioning, **excluding however, self-induced states caused by alcohol or drugs, as well as transitory mental states such as hysteria or concussion**. In order to support a defence of insanity the disease must, of course, be of such intensity as to **render the accused incapable of appreciating the nature and quality of the violent act** or of **knowing that it is wrong**.

**B. APPRECIATING THE NATURE AND QUALITY OF THE ACT**

!!! info "***Cooper v. R.***, [1979 CanLII 63 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1tx9m){:target=" \_blank"}, Cont'd"

    - The draftsman of the **s 16** of the *Criminal Code* ("knows the nature and quality of his act"), as originally enacted, made a deliberate change in language from the common law rule in order to **broaden the legal and medical considerations** bearing upon the mental state of the accused and to make it clear that **cognition** was not to be the sole criterion. **Emotional**, as well as **intellectual**, awareness of the significance of the conduct, is in issue. 
    - To “**know**” the nature and quality of an act may mean merely to be aware of the physical act, while to “**appreciate**” may involve estimation and understanding of the consequences of that act. 
    - The **true test** necessarily is, was the accused person at the very time of the offence, not before or after, **but at the moment of the offence**, by reason of disease of the mind, unable fully to appreciate **not only the nature** of the act **but the natural consequence**s that would flow from it?
    -  ...in employing the word “**appreciates**,” imports an additional requirement to mere knowledge of the physical quality of the act. The requirement, **unique to Canada**, is that of perception, an ability to perceive the consequences, impact, and results of a physical act. 

In ***Kjeldsen v. The Queen***, [1981 CanLII 218 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1z456){:target=" \_blank"}, the Court stated (at 623):

> To be capable of “appreciating” the nature and quality of his acts, an accused person must have the capacity to know what he is doing; ... and in addition he must have the capacity to estimate and to understand the physical consequences which would flow from his act.

On the other hand, **lacks of appropriate feelings for the victim is not a defence** under s. 16. In ***Regina v. Simpson***, [1977 CanLII 1142 (ON CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/g1dvj){:target=" \_blank"} (at 28):

> ... I do not think the exemption provided by the section extends to one who has the necessary understanding of the nature, character and consequences of the act, but merely lacks appropriate feelings for the victim or lacks feelings of remorse or guilt for what he has done, even though such lack of feeling stems from “disease of the mind."

!!! info "***R. v. Abbey***, [1982 CanLII 25 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1lpcd){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - [The trial judge found that the accused’s ability to appreciate the nature and quality of the act was incapacitated to the degree required by s 16 of the *Criminal Code* in that he failed to appreciate the consequences of punishment for his acts.]
    - Although there is some controversy in academic circles, I adopt the more traditional view ..., that a delusion falling under the “first arm” of the insanity defence negatives an element of the crime, the *mens rea*. ... 
        - A delusion which renders an accused “**incapable of appreciating the nature and quality of his act**” goes to the *mens rea* of the offence and brings into operation the “first arm” of s. 16(2): he is not guilty by reason of insanity. 
        - A delusion which renders an accused **incapable of appreciating that the penal sanctions** attaching to the commission of the crime are applicable to him does not go to the *mens rea* of the offence, does not render him incapable of appreciating the nature and quality of the act, and **does not bring into operation the “first arm” of the insanity defence**. 
    - I am of the view that the trial judge erred in law in holding that a person who by reason of disease of the mind does **not “appreciate” the penal consequences** of his actions is insane within the meaning of s. 16(2) of the *Criminal Code*.

**C. KNOWING THAT THE ACT IS WRONG** 

!!! info "*R. v. Chaulk*, [1990 CanLII 34 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fspm){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - This Court has also been asked to revisit its interpretation of the meaning of the word “**wrong**” found in **s. 16(2)**. 
    - The meaning of the term “**wrong**” for the purposes of s. 16(2) was determined by this court in ***Schwartz v. The Queen***, [1977] 1 S.C.R. 673. Speaking for the majority, **Martland J.** held that the capacity to know that an act is wrong in this context means no more than the capacity to know that what one is doing is **against the law of the land**. **Dickson J.**, as he then was, dissented in ***Schwartz***. He noted that the word “wrong” as used in s. 16(2) is ambiguous and is capable of meaning **either “legally” or “morally” wrong**.
    - ...it is my opinion that ***Schwartz*** was wrongly decided by this Court and that the dissenting opinion of Dickson J. (concurred in by Laskin C.J., Spence and Beetz JJ.) is to be preferred. 
    - ...as was pointed out by Dickson J. in ***Schwartz***, *supra*, “‘**[m]oral wrong**’ is not to be judged by the personal standards of the offender but by his awareness that society regards the act as wrong” (p. 678).

!!! info "*R. v. Oommen*, [1994 CanLII 101 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1frs9){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - The trial judge held that the accused was not entitled to the mental disorder defence because he had the capacity to **know that society in general would regard his acts as wrong** even though “subjectively the accused did not believe his act to be wrong” and “he believed that he had no choice to do anything but what he did.” The Supreme Court reversed his murder conviction and ordered a new trial.
    - The only **issue** was whether this delusion exempted Mr. Oommen from criminal responsibility under s. 16(1) of the *Criminal Code* on the ground that he lacked the capacity at the relevant time to **know the difference between right and wrong**.
    - Dr. Trichard testified that ... In the abstract, the person would know killing was wrong. But his delusion would cause him to believe that killing was justified under the circumstances as he perceived them.
    - This appeal poses the following legal issue. What is meant by the phrase “knowing that [the act] was wrong” in s. 16(1)? 
        - Does it refer only to **abstract knowledge that the act of killing would be viewed as wrong** by society? 
        - Or does it extend to the **inability to rationally apply knowledge of right and wrong and hence to conclude that the act in question is one which one ought not to do**? ✅
    - ... the inquiry focuses not on general capacity to know right from wrong, but rather on the ability to know that **a particular act was wrong in the circumstances**.
    - Both the question and answer demonstrate that the rule focuses **not on a general capacity** to understand right and wrong in some abstract sense, **but on the particular capacity** of the accused to understand that his or her act was wrong at the time of committing the act.
    - As the cases make clear, s. 16(1) of the *Criminal Code* embraces **not only** the intellectual ability to know right from wrong, **but** the capacity to apply that knowledge to the situation at hand.

**D. CONSIDERING THE TWO ALTERNATIVE ARMS OF THE MENTAL DISORDER DEFENCE TOGETHER**

In ***R. v. Landry***, [1991 CanLII 114 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fsn3){:target=" \_blank"}, the court held,

> In accordance with our decisions in ***R. v. Cooper***, *supra*, ***R. v. Kjeldsen***, [1981] 2 S.C.R. 617, and ***R. v. Abbey***, [1982] 2 S.C.R. 24, the **first branch of the s. 16(2)** test protects an accused who, because of a disease of the mind, was incapable of **appreciating** the physical consequences of his act.

> It was established at trial and accepted by the Court of Appeal that the respondent in this case suffered from a disease of the mind to the extent that he was rendered incapable of **knowing that the act was morally wrong** in the circumstances.

**Chapter 16 INTOXICATION**

The law has responded to this dilemma by creating what many have criticized as an artificial and unclear distinction between “**general intent**” and “**specific intent**” offences. Traditionally, courts would allow intoxication as a defence to specific intent offences, such as murder and robbery, but not allow intoxication as a defence to general intent offences, such as man-slaughter and assault. This often had the practical effect that intoxication could result in **an acquittal for more serious crimes but conviction for less mentally complex crimes** or those based on objective modes of fault.

**I. THE COMMON LAW DEFENCE OF INTOXICATION**

!!! info "*DPP v Beard*, [1920] AC 479 (HL)"

    - Under the law of England as it prevailed until early in the nineteenth century **voluntary drunkenness was never an excuse for criminal misconduct**; and indeed the classic authorities broadly assert that voluntary drunk-enness must be considered rather an aggravation than a defence.
    - Notwithstanding the difference in the language used I come to the conclusion that (except in cases where insanity is pleaded) these decisions establish that **where a specific intent is an essential** element in the offence, evidence of a state of **drunkenness rendering the accused incapable of forming such an intent should be taken into consideration** in order to determine whether he had in fact formed the intent necessary to constitute the particular crime.
    - This does not mean that the drunkenness in itself is an excuse for the crime but that the state of **drunkenness may be incompatible with the actual crime charged** and may therefore negative the commission of that crime.
    - The conclusions to be drawn from these cases may be stated under **three heads**:
        - That insanity, whether produced by drunkenness or otherwise, is a **defence** to the crime charged. 
        - That evidence of **drunkenness** which renders the accused incapable of forming the specific intent essential to constitute the crime should be taken into consideration with the other facts proved in order to **determine whether or not he had this intent**.
        - That evidence of **drunkenness** **falling short of a proved incapacity** in the accused to form the intent necessary to constitute the crime, and merely establishing that his mind was affected by drink so that he more readily gave way to some violent passion, does **not rebut the presumption that a man intends the natural consequences of his acts**.

For many years, courts in Canada followed this formulation of the intoxication defence. However, in ***R. v. Robinson***, [1996 CanLII 233 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1frbh){:target=" \_blank"} the Supreme Court of Canada reconsidered this formulation and, for the majority, **Lamer CJ** concluded at para 54 that a jury should be charged “that **their overall duty is to determine whether or not the accused possessed the requisite intent for the crime**.” This requires a focus on the accused’s actual intent, not simply on whether he or she had the capacity (but perhaps did not exercise it) for the intent. 

**Chapter 17 SELF-DEFENCE**










































