---
layout: post
title: L525 Unit 5
date: 2026-03-07
draft: false
categories:
  - Law
tags:
  - LAW_V 525 99C 2025W2 Canadian Criminal Law and Procedure
  - Unit 5
---

#  Extensions of Criminal Liability

<!-- #### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">**Module Content**</p> -->

## 5.1 Introduction

Criminal law is not solely concerned with a single offender who has completed a criminal offence. The principles of extending criminal liability recognize:

- different **forms of participation** in criminal offences, going beyond the direct perpetrator (or “principal offender”), and
- liability for **incomplete offences or “attempts.”**

!!! note "Readings"

    - Textbook: pp 525-526, 526-536, 536-541, 541-544, 545-549, 549-551, 551-555, 558-561, 569-571, 571-573, 577-584

??? warning "ss 21, 22 of the *Criminal Code*"

    **Parties to offence**

    **21** 
    
    (1) Every one is a party to an offence who

    (a) actually commits it;

    (b) does or omits to do anything for the purpose of aiding any person to commit it; or

    (c) abets any person in committing it.

    **Common intention**

    (2) Where two or more persons form an intention in common to carry out an unlawful purpose and to assist each other therein and any one of them, in carrying out the common purpose, commits an offence, each of them who knew or ought to have known that the commission of the offence would be a probable consequence of carrying out the common purpose is a party to that offence.

    **Person counselling offence**

    **22** 
    
    (1) Where a person counsels another person to be a party to an offence and that other person is afterwards a party to that offence, the person who counselled is a party to that offence, notwithstanding that the offence was committed in a way different from that which was counselled.

    ***Idem***

    (2) Every one who counsels another person to be a party to an offence is a party to every offence that the other commits in consequence of the counselling that the person who counselled knew or ought to have known was likely to be committed in consequence of the counselling.

    **Definition of counsel**

    (3) For the purposes of this Act, counsel includes procure, solicit or incite.

## 5.2 Principal Offenders

Principal offenders are described in section 21(1)(a) of the *Criminal Code* as the person who “actually commits” the offence. We will examine the legal significance of section 21(1) in this topic, which identifies not only the principal offender, but also those who are a “party” to the offence by “**aiding** or **abetting**” the principal offender.

**Principal Offenders and Parties to Offences**

The decision in ***R. v. Thatcher***, [1987 CanLII 53 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1ftkz){:target=" \_blank"} shows the legal significance of section 21(1) of the *Criminal Code*, which makes the distinction between principal offenders versus aiders/abetters to an offence “legally irrelevant”, they are all **“parties” to the offence, and thus “equally culpable”**.

Do you have any concerns about the Supreme Court of Canada’s decision in this case, specifically, their finding that the jury need not be unanimous as to whether Thatcher murdered his wife with his own hands, or whether he hired someone to kill her? Should a person who hires a killer be equally culpable (considered just as guilty) as a person who does the killing themselves?

<p class="highlight blue" markdown="1">**Study Tips**</p>

- Go through the following terminology, become familiar with it, and be able to define these concepts. You may need to come back to some of these after studying the text two topics. Which sections of the Criminal Code help define these terms?
    - **principal offender**, **party to an offence**, **aider**, **abetter**, **equally culpable**, **common intention**, **counselling an offence**
- Be able to explain in your own words why it is **legally irrelevant** whether someone directly committed an offence themselves, or whether they aided/abetted someone else to commit the offence.

## 5.3 Aiding and Abetting

The most straightforward mode of liability extending beyond principal offenders and co-principals is **aiding** and **abetting**. 

“Aiding” refers to some form of **“material assistance”** (e.g. knowingly serving as a look-out or get-away driver during a robbery), whereas “abetting” refers to **encouragement** (e.g. verbal encouragement) to the person who “actually commits” the offence (i.e. the principal offender).

**Parties to Offences**: s 21 of the *Criminal Code*. See above.

**Actus Reus of Aiding and Abetting**

In ***R. v. Greyeyes***, [1997 CanLII 313 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fqzd){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada grappled with whether someone who assists the purchaser of illegal drugs is a party to drug trafficking. This case is an important introduction to the **limits of aiding and abetting** as a mode of liability.

***R. v. Greyeyes*** introduced **a new legal argument** in drug cases called “**Agent** for the Purchaser”. Courts now apply the test set out in ***R. v. Greyeyes*** when dealing with such scenarios: did the Accused provided **more that incidental assistance** in facilitating the drug transaction? If so, then s/he can be found guilty under s.21(1) of aiding the offence of drug trafficking.

***Dunlop and Sylvester v. The Queen***, [1979 CanLII 20 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1mkv8){:target=" \_blank"} is the first in a series of decisions that we will read that considesr how the “**mere presence**” of the Accused at a crime scene should be considered in determining whether they are a party to a criminal offence. 

In ***Dunlop and Sylvester***, Justice Dickson (as he then was) for the majority held that:

> A person is **not guilty** merely because he is present at the scene of a crime and does nothing to prevent it. 

However, he added that:

> Presence at the commission of an offence **can be evidence of aiding and abetting, if accompanied by other factors**, such as prior knowledge of the principal offender’s intention to commit the offence or attendance for the purpose of encouragement.

It is important to note that this **includes an element of mental fault**: “A person cannot properly be convicted of aiding/abetting in the commission of acts which he does not know may or are intended.”

In ***R. v. Jackson***, [2007 SCC 52](https://canlii.ca/t/1v0j4){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada returns to the issue of what role the presence of an Accused should have on the aiding/abetting analysis. As you read this case, apply the concepts set out in ***Dunlop and Sylvester***, was Jackson merely present, or were there other factors at play?

These brief excerpts from two supplementary cases identify the following additional principles/scenarios related to **presence of the Accused** and **aiding/abetting**:

***R. v. Nixon***, [1990 CanLII 10993 (BC CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/g9cfp){:target=" \_blank"}: In upholding the conviction, Justice Legg stated

> An accused who is present at the scene of an offence and who carries out no overt acts to aid or encourage the commission of the offence may none the less be convicted as a party if **his purpose in failing to act was to aid in the commission of the offence**. 

Factors relevant in this case included:

- Presence of the Accused at the time of the assault
- Knowledge of the assault
- Statutory duty to protect the victim
- **Failure to act amounts to encouragement** of the principal offender

***R. v. Popen***, [1981 CanLII 3345 (ON CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/gb3r9){:target=" \_blank"}:

> In some circumstances, a person who is present at the commission of an illegal act, which he has a duty to prevent, may **by mere inactivity encourage the illegal act**.

***Mens Rea* of Aiding and Abetting**

Recall that Section 21(1) of the *Criminal Code* encompasses anyone who “does or omits to do anything **for the purpose of** aiding any person to commit [an offence]” (emphasis added). The following decisions consider what level of mental fault this requires.

***R. v. Briscoe***, [2010 SCC 13](https://canlii.ca/t/29280){:target=" \_blank"}

As you read through this decision, focus on paragraphs **13 to 17** and the court’s discussion of how *mens rea* is analysed in the context of an aiding and abetting case.

> [16] The *mens rea* requirement reflected in the word “purpose” under s. 21(1)(b) has two components: **intent** and **knowledge**. For the intent component, it was settled in ***R. v. Hibbert***, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 973, that “**purpose**” in s. 21(1)(b) should be understood as essentially **synonymous with “intention”**. The Crown must prove that the accused intended to assist the principal in the commission of the offence. The Court emphasized that “purpose” should not be interpreted as incorporating the notion of “desire” into the fault requirement for party liability. It is therefore **not required that the accused desired that the offence be successfully committed** (***Hibbert***, at para. 35).

> [17] As for **knowledge**, in order to have the intention to assist in the commission of an offence, the aider must know that the perpetrator intends to commit the crime, although **he or she need not know precisely how it will be committed**. That sufficient knowledge is a prerequisite for intention is simply a matter of common sense.

<p class="highlight blue" markdown="1">**Study Tips**</p>

- What does it mean to “**aid**” someone in the context of s.21(1)? What does it mean to “**abet**”?
- Map out how you would approach an exam question where an individual appears to be “merely present” at the scene of a crime. What factors would you consider in determining whether s.21(1) applies? What case law would you refer to, and what tests would you apply from those cases?
- Know how both the *actus reus* and *mens rea* factor in to a s.21(1) analysis. Be able to approach a s.21(1) fact scenario with an examination of both the *actus reus* and the *mens rea*.

## 5.4 Common Intention

Common intention is the most complicated mode of liability that we will learn, but it is also the most interesting and potentially controversial. It expands the net of criminal responsibility beyond the principal offender, co-principals (if any), aiders/abetters (if any), to **persons who do not actually assist or encourage the commission of the offence** for which they are charged as a party.

**Common Intention**: **s.21(2)** of the *Criminal Code*.

Here is the section broken down into its base components. Note the important role *mens rea* plays in s.21(2).

!!! warning "21(2) Where two or more persons"

    - form an **intention in common**
    - to carry out an **unlawful purpose** and to **assist each other** therein
    - and any one of them, in carrying out the common purpose, **commits an offence**
    - each of them who **knew or ought to have known** that the commission of the **offence** would be a probable consequence of carrying out the common purpose
    - is a party to that offence.

The Supreme Court of Canada decision in ***R. v. Kirkness***, [1990 CanLII 57 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fsqc){:target=" \_blank"} recognizes a number of **key principles with respect to common intention**. 

Note the following points of law from **Justice Wilson**'s dissenting opinion:

- common intention **need not be pre-planned** in any way. it is sufficient that it arise[s] just prior to or at the time of the commission of the offence.
- The essential elements of common intention are usually "**implied from the facts**"
- Where one has **aided or abetted** in the commission of an offence, there can be little doubt that **a shared intention** to effect an unlawful purpose existed
- To abandon participation in the unlawful purpose, "**abandonment**" (which can be a defence for common intention) requires "something more than a mere mental change of intention and physical change of place; where practicable and reasonable there must be timely communication of the intention to abandon the common purpose to those who desire to continue it; defendants will be held to a different standard depending upon the degree of participation in the crime
- A causal, but not a temporal **connection, is required** between the unlawful act and the ultimate offence

**Constitutional Issues with Common Intention**

The potential for someone to be liable through common intention for an offence that they "ought to have known" would be a probable consequence of carrying out the common purpose (*Criminal Code*, section 21(2)) raises potential constitutional issues due to the **objective fault** level that it creates.

Based on what we have already learned about when objective mental fault is constitutionally impermissible, do you think section 21(2) is valid as worded for all criminal offences? If not, which offences are excluded from its ambit? After you have considered these questions, read the Supreme Court of Canada decision below to see if your answers were correct.

In ***R. v. Logan***, [1990 CanLII 84 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fssn){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada considered the constitutional validity of the "**ought to have known**" aspect of common intention. 

It found that it is a constitutional requirement under s.7 of the *Charter* for some offences to have subjective *mens rea*. This is due to the seriousness of those offences and the stigma involved in their conviction.

However, **for other offences, the "ought to have known" standard still applies**. This means that an offence section could require the Crown to prove that the principal offender had subjective intention or knowledge etc., but if that subjective *mens rea* isn't constitutionally required, the common intender could be liable on only the objective mental fault basis.

In ***R. v. Jackson***, [1993 CanLII 53 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1frvw){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada applies the test set out in ***Logan***. It found that because murder requires subjective mental fault under section 7 of the *Charter*, someone cannot be convicted as a party to a murder through common intention on an objective mental fault level (that they "ought to have known" the murder was a probable consequence). 

**However**, such an Accused could be convicted as a common intender of the lesser and included offence of manslaughter on an "ought to have known" standard because **manslaughter does not require subjective mental fault under section 7 of the *Charter***.

<p class="highlight blue" markdown="1">**Study Tips**</p>

- Familiarize yourself with "**s.21(2) Common Intention**" and know how it differs in application from "**s.21(1) Aiding & Abetting**"?
- Consider the following approach when analysing a s.21(2) fact pattern:
    - Ask yourself what is the **underlying offence**?
    - Did the Accused and the principal offender(s) have an **intention in common** to carry out an unlawful purpose and to **assist each other** therein?
    - Did any one of them, in carrying out the common purpose, **commit the underlying offence?** (your focus here is on the *actus reus*)
    - Did the Accused **know** that the commission of the offence would be a probable consequence of carrying out the common purpose? (note that this is the **subjective** 21(2) component of the test)
    - If not, you must then turn to the objective component of the s.21(2) test: should the Accused "**ought to of known**" that the commission of the offence would be a probable consequence of carrying out the common purpose? Remember that this "ought to have known" **objective** standard can **only apply if the principle offender is not constitutionally required to have subjective *mens rea***.
 
## 5.5 Attempts

People are not only liable for completed offences, they can also be criminal liable for attempting to commit an offence (also called “inchoate liability”). 

**Mental fault** is the dominant feature of attempts and the main issue is typically **whether the conduct of the Accused has gone far enough to constitute an attempted crime**. As you read the cases and materials, consider when you think it is appropriate to criminalize an attempt, where should the line be drawn?

**Statutory Provisions Related to Attempts**

Attempts are “culpable conduct and fault that lies between innocent behaviour and successful completion of a substantive offence”.

A key reason for criminalizing attempts is that “[t]here is a demonstrable and sufficient harm once the commission of a criminal offence has been set in motion to sanction the commencement of the offence as criminal conduct on its own.”

Section 24(1) of the *Criminal Code* is the general statutory provision for attempts and is **applicable to any offence** in the *Code*:

!!! warning ""

    **24**
    
    (1) Every one who, having an intent to commit an offence, does or omits to do anything for the purpose of carrying out the intention is **guilty of an attempt** to commit the offence whether or not it was possible under the circumstances to commit the offence.

    (2) The question whether an act or omission by a person who has an intent to commit an offence is or is not mere preparation to commit the offence, and **too remote** to constitute an attempt to commit the offence, is a question of law.

Let us break **s.24(1)** down and look more closely at its individual components.

24.(1) Every one who,

- having an **intent** to commit an offence  (mens rea)
- **does or omits to do** anything  (actus reus)
- **for the purpose of** carrying out the intention  (mens rea – remember how this phraseology means the same as “intention”)

is guilty of an attempt to commit the offence

- **whether or not it was possible** under the circumstances to commit the offence  (we will deal with impossibilities later in this Topic)

A key issue that we will explore in this section is when an act or omission has gone beyond “**mere preparation**” or is “**too remote to constitute an attempt**.”

In addition to section 24 of the *Criminal Code*, there are some offences that are already **self-defined as attempts**, such as section 71 (**attempting to duel**), section 119 (**attempting to bribe judicial official**), section 368 (**attempting to cause a person to act upon forged document**), and many offences in Part II.1 (**terrorism offences**).

**Section 463** of the *Criminal Code* sets out the **general penalties for attempts**.  This provision applies to any attempted offence unless there is a specific penalty set out for the attempted offence, as in section 239 of the *Criminal Code* for attempted murder.  Note how the penalties for attempted crimes are **generally a reduced version** of what the Accused would have incurred as a sentence if the crime had been completed.

??? warning "Section 463 of the *Criminal Code* – General Penalties for Attempts"

    **Attempts, Accessories**

    s.463 Except where otherwise expressly provided by law, the following provisions apply in respect of persons who attempt to commit or are accessories after the fact to the commission of offences:

    (a) every one who attempts to commit or is an accessory after the fact to the commission of an indictable offence for which, on conviction, an accused is liable to be sentenced to imprisonment for life is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding **fourteen years**;

    (b) every one who attempts to commit or is an accessory after the fact to the commission of an indictable offence for which, on conviction, an accused is liable to imprisonment for fourteen years or less is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term that is **one-half of the longest term** to which a person who is guilty of that offence is liable;

    (c) every one who attempts to commit or is an accessory after the fact to the commission of an offence punishable on summary conviction is guilty of an offence punishable on **summary conviction**; and

    (d) every one who attempts to commit or is an accessory after the fact to the commission of an offence for which the offender may be prosecuted by indictment or for which he is punishable on summary conviction

    (i) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding a term that is **one-half of the longest term** to which a person who is guilty of that offence is liable, or

    (ii) is guilty of an offence punishable on **summary conviction**.

***Mens Rea* for Attempts**

Section 24(1) of the *Criminal Code* states that to be liable for an attempt the Accused must **intend** to commit the offence, and their conduct must be **for the purpose of** carrying out this intention. This subjective *mens rea* component is at the heart of an attempts analysis.  Did the Accused have a specific intention to carry out the full offence?  This **analysis requires an examination of the surrounding circumstances** and often the drawing of **inferences** about what the Accused was thinking.

***Actus Reus* for Attempts**

An intention to commit an offence is not enough, by itself, to support a conviction under s.24(1).  There must also be some external conduct whereby the Accused **acts on that intention**.

In ***Regina v. Cline***, [1956 CanLII 150 (ON CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/g176x){:target=" \_blank"}, the Ontario Court of Appeal provided guidance on when **conduct is sufficient to constitute an attempt.** Some key principles from this case include the following:

- Misconduct for attempts lies mainly in the mental fault, the Accused has the **intent** to commit the offence
- The *actus reus* for an attempt need not be a crime/tort/moral or social wrong
- The *actus reus* must **go beyond “mere preparation”** (as stated in section 24(2) of the *Criminal Code*)

***Deutsch v. The Queen***, [1986 CanLII 21 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fts2){:target=" \_blank"} is the leading case setting out the **test** for the **whether an Accused has committed the *actus reus* of an attempt**. 

It is key to this analysis that we first understand what the *actus reus* is for the **completed offence**. Then, to determine whether the Accused is liable for attempting the offence, one must analyze the relationship between the nature and quality of the act in question (i.e. the conduct of the Accused) and the nature of the completed offence.  

In doing so, the Supreme Court of Canada says we are to consider the **relative proximity** of the acts of the Accused **in relation to the completed offence** (i.e. in terms of time, location, and the things the Accused still had left to do).  Note the following passages from this case.

> [27] In my opinion the distinction between preparation and attempt is essentially a qualitative one, involving the relationship between the nature and quality of the act in question and the nature of the complete offence, although consideration must necessarily be given, in making that qualitative distinction, to the relative proximity of the act in question to what would have been the completed offence, in terms of time, location and acts under the control of the accused remaining to be accomplished. I find that view to be compatible with what has been said about the *actus reus* of attempt in this Court and in other Canadian decisions that should be treated as authoritative on this question.

> [28] The most recent expression of opinion in this Court on what constitutes an attempt to commit an offence is the judgment in ***R. v. Ancio***, 1984 CanLII 69 (SCC), [1984] 1 S.C.R. 225, where the issue was the intent required for attempted murder. McIntyre J., in the course of a review of the development of the law of attempt, said with reference to the *mens rea* and the *actus reus* of attempt at p. 247:

>> As with any other crime, the Crown must prove a *mens rea*, that is, the intent to commit the offence in question and the *actus reus*, that is, some step towards the commission of the offence attempted going beyond mere acts of preparation. Of the two elements the more significant is the *mens rea*.

> McIntyre J. referred with approval to the judgment of Laidlaw J.A. in *R. v. Cline*, *supra*, particularly for what it said concerning the relative importance of *mens rea* in attempt, but that judgment has also been treated as helpful for what it said concerning the application of the distinction between preparation and attempt. With reference to this question Laidlaw J.A. said at p. 28:

>> The consummation of a crime usually comprises a series of acts which have their genesis in an idea to do a criminal act; the idea develops to a decision to do that act; a plan may be made for putting that decision into effect; the next step may be preparation only for carrying out the intention and plan; but **when that preparation is in fact fully completed, the next step in the series of acts done by the accused** for the purpose and with the intention of committing the crime as planned cannot, in my opinion, be regarded as remote in its connection with that crime. **The connection is in fact proximate**.

**Impossibility and Attempts**

Recall that **section 24(2)** of the *Criminal Code* states: 

> Every one who, having an intent to commit an offence, does or omits to do anything for the purpose of carrying out his intention is guilty of an attempt to commit the offence **whether or not it was possible under the circumstances to commit the offence**. (emphasis added)

Canadian courts have generally divided impossibilities into two categories: 

- (1) those that are **factually impossible**, and 
- (2) those that are **legally impossible**.  

Factual impossibility exits where an Accused intends to commit an offence but is prevented from doing so because of some factual circumstance (ie, goes to rob a bank but the bank is closed for the day and all locked up).  Legal impossibility occurs where the “criminal activity” the Accused intends to do is, unknown to them, not actually illegal because of a state of law (ie, an Accused tries to steal something that s/he actually already owns). 

There is another category of impossibilities referred to as “**Imaginary Crimes**”.  These acts, perceived by the Accused as being criminal, are not actually criminal acts at all.  It is therefore irrelevant whether the Accused intends to commit the act, as the act is not illegal to perform.

What do you think is the purpose and importance of this provision? Consider this question as you read the next decision that interprets and applies it.

***United States of America v. Dynar***, [1997 CanLII 359 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fr0t){:target=" \_blank"} is an extradition case related to alleged offences in the United States. For Canada to have extradited in this matter (sent the Accused back to the U.S. for trial), the Court must have found that there was “**double criminality**”, meaning that the conduct of the Accused would have been an offence if committed in Canada.

As you read the decision, identify the differences between “factual impossibility” versus “legal impossibility” and whether either or both can operate as a defence to an attempted offence. Likewise, what is meant by an “imaginary crime” and what is its legal significance in this discussion.

<p class="highlight blue" markdown="1">**Study Tips**</p>

- Know what *mens rea* and what *actus reus* is required for someone to be convicted of an attempted crime under *Criminal Code* s.24(2).  What **test(s)** would you apply to determine whether an Accused took sufficient *actus reus* steps to be held criminally responsible?
- Be familiar with the **penalties for attempted crimes**, and how they differ from the penalties for committing the crime to completion.
- What are **factual impossibilities** and **legal impossibilities**?  How do they affect whether or not someone can be convicted under s.24(2) for attempting to commit a criminal offence?  Why did the court in ***R. v. Dynar*** call them “legally irrelevant”?
- What are **imaginary crimes**?  Do they affect whether or not someone can be convicted under s.24(2) for attempting to commit a criminal offence?  

## 5.6 End of Unit 5 Short Quiz

!!! danger "Quiz"

    1. Which of the following are parties to an offence?
        - [ ] Principal offender
        - [ ] Co-principal
        - [ ] Aider
        - [ ] Abetter
        - [ ] Common intender
        - [x] All of the above

    2. True/False: In some circumstances, a person who is present at the commission of an illegal act can be said to have encouraged the act, if he had **a duty to prevent** the act but did nothing.
        - [x] True
        - [ ] False

    3. Which of the following offences can an Accused be convicted of, as a party, through the objective “ought to have known” *mens rea* standard of s.21(2) common intention?
        - [ ] Dangerous driving causing death
        - [ ] Criminal negligence causing death
        - [ ] Manslaughter
        - [x] All of the above
        - [ ] None of the above

    4. Yes/No: If an Accused is charged as a party under s.21(2) common intention, can he successfully claim **abandonment** if his only abandoning action was to leave the scene of the crime prior to its completion?
        - [ ] yes
        - [x] no

    5. Based on ***Deutsch v. The Queen***, which of the following is an aspect of proximity that a court will consider when determining whether the Accused is guilty of an attempted offence?
        - [x] Location
        - [ ] Relationship between the accused and the victim
        - [ ] Conduct of third parties
        - [ ] All of the above

    6. What test will a court apply to determine whether an Accused assisted the buyer or the seller in a criminal transaction?
        - [ ] Length of time spent together
        - [x] Whether more than incidental assistance was provided
        - [ ] Relationship between the parties
        - [ ] An examination of moral culpability

## Textbook Summary: pp 525-555, 558-561, 569-573, 577-584

**Chapter 9: PARTICIPATION**

On what basis is a person’s involvement in the commission of a criminal offence sufficient for him or her to be held liable as a party to the offence? Between the **actual perpetrator** of the offence and an **innocent bystander** lies a broad **margin** of connection or involvement in the commission of an offence.

There are five modes of participation identified in **ss 21 and 22** of the *Criminal Code*.

- Parties to offence: 21(1)
- Common intention: 21(2)
- Person counselling offence: 22(1)
- Idem: 22(2)
- Definition of “counsel”: 22(3)

This means that those who **commit** the actual offence and others who simply **assist** them or **urge** them to commit the offence are **all guilty of the same offence**. Though all are criminally liable for the offence, the **actual degree of participation** of each offender in the crime will be a key **consideration in sentencing**.

An **accessory after the fact** is **not a party** to the offence but is nonetheless liable for facilitating a party’s escape. 

**I. MODES OF PARTICIPATION**

Section 21(1) of the *Criminal Code* puts an aider or abettor on the same legal footing as a principal (***R. v. Thatcher***, [1987 CanLII 53 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1ftkz){:target=" \_blank"}). Each of these parties will be convicted of the offence in which they are proven to have participated.

In ***Thatcher***, the Supreme Court of Canada held that a jury can **convict** an accused if every member of the jury is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that **the accused was either a principal or an aider or abettor**. ==It is not necessary for the jury to reach unanimity about which mode of participation applies.==

!!! info "*R. v. Thatcher*, [1987 CanLII 53 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1ftkz){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - [3] ... in order to find Mr. Thatcher guilty of murder, the jury had to be unanimous that he intentionally killed his former wife or, alternatively, that he aided or abetted another person or persons in her killing; it was simply not sufficient that some members of the jury would hold to one theory and other members would hold to the other theory. That, as I see it, is the **principal issue** in this appeal. 
    - [72] Thus, **s. 21** has been designed to **alleviate** the necessity for the Crown choosing between two different forms of participation in a criminal offence. The law stipulates that both forms of participation are not only equally culpable, but should be treated as one single mode of incurring criminal liability. **The Crown is not under a duty to separate the different forms of participation in a criminal offence into different counts**. 
    - [82] ... As Professor Peter MacKinnon points out in “*Jury Unanimity: A Reply to Gelowitz and Stuart*” (1986), 51 C.R. (3d) 134, at p. 135, if an accused is to be acquitted in situations when every juror is convinced that the accused committed a murder in one of two ways, merely because the jury cannot agree on which of the two ways, “it is difficult to imagine a situation more likely to bring the administration of justice into disrepute, and deservedly so.”

In ***R v Pickton***, the Supreme Court of Canada considered how to apply the ***Thatcher*** principle。

!!! info "*R. v. Pickton*, [2010 SCC 32](https://canlii.ca/t/2bttm){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - [21] ... The fallacy of Mr. Pickton’s argument lies in the fact that the defence theory itself **put the participation of others at issue**. Throughout the trial, the defence by its approach urged the jury to consider that others may have actually killed the victims. An inevitable consequence of going down that road is that the jury would have to be instructed on **how this could, if at all, impact on Mr. Pickton’s own criminal liability**.
    - [23] ... the following instruction given to the jury immediately following the trial judge’s explanation of the elements of the offence of first degree murder:
        - [8] A person commits an offence if he, **alone or along with somebody else or others**, personally does everything necessary to constitute the offence. Accordingly, **it is not necessary for you to find that Mr. Pickton acted alone in order to find him guilty of the offence**. You may find that Mr. Pickton acted in concert with other persons, although you may not know who they are. It is sufficient if you are satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt, having considered all the evidence, that he **actively participated in the killing of the victim**. It is not sufficient that he was merely present or took a minor role. The issue for you to decide is whether you are satisfied that it has been proven that he was involved to the extent that the law requires [to] establish his criminal liability. 
    - [51] Generally speaking, there are two forms of liability for *Criminal Code* offences, **primary or principal liability** (actually or personally committing the offence), and **secondary liability** (also known as party liability), both codified in s. 21 of the *Criminal Code*. Whether an accused is found guilty either as a principal offender or as a party to the offence, the result is the **same in law**: **the accused will be convicted of the substantive offence**.
    - [53] Under s. 21(1)(b) and (c), an accused will be found liable for an offence even if he or she did not commit all elements of that offence, **but provided aid or encouragement, with the requisite** *mens rea*, to another person who did commit the offence. 
    - [58] Three principles from the decision in ***Thatcher*** are relevant here. 
        - **First**, if there is evidence admitted at trial which properly supports an alternate mode of liability under s. 21, an instruction on that section should be left with the jury, even though the identity of the other participant or participants is unknown, and even though the precise part played by each participant may be uncertain. 
        - **Second**, it is not necessary for the trial judge to relate the law to the evidence which could support the alternate theory of aiding and abetting where evidence adduced by the Crown relates to either mode of participation, and evidence adduced by the defence relates to either the accused’s innocence or the accused’s guilt under the relevant subsection(s) of s. 21. 
        - **Finally**, a jury need not be unanimous on the nature of the accused’s participation in the offence, so long as it is satisfied that the accused either committed the offence personally or, alternatively, aided and abetted another to commit the offence, provided the jury is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused did one or the other.
    - [76] The main focus of s. 21(1)(b) and (c) is on the **intention** with which the aid or encouragement has been provided. The act or omission relied upon must in fact aid or abet, and it must also have been done with the particular intention **to facilitate or encourage** the principal’s commission of the offence, with knowledge that the principal intends to commit the crime: ***R. v. Briscoe***, [2010] 1 S.C.R. 411, at paras. 14 and 16-18. To be found liable for first degree murder as an aider and abettor of a planned and deliberate murder, an accused must have **knowledge** that the murder was planned and deliberate: ***Briscoe***, at para. 17. **Wilful blindness** will satisfy the knowledge component of s. 21(1)(b) or (c): ***Briscoe***, at para. 21. 

Section 21(2) extends party liability when two or more persons act with a **common intention** to carry out an unlawful purpose. Section 22 establishes that a person who **counsels** the commission of an offence will become a party if the offence is subsequently committed. **Aiding, abetting, common intention, and counselling an offence** that is ultimately committed are the **forms of secondary (or party) liability**.

**II. AIDING AND ABETTING**

**Aiding** is typically associated with some form of **material assistance** in the commission of an offence, whereas **abetting** is usually associated with **verbal encouragement or comparable forms of incitement**.

**A. DEFINING THE SCOPE OF LIABILITY**

In ***R v Greyeyes***, the Supreme Court of Canada considered the **definition of aiding and abetting** and the circumstances in which party liability for trafficking in narcotics would be extended to a person who assists a prospective purchaser of narcotics to find a source from whom they might buy.

!!! info "*R. v. Greyeyes*, [1997 CanLII 313 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fqzd){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - [26] ... To aid under s. 21(1)(b) means to **assist or help the actor** ... To abet within the meaning of s. 21(1)(c) includes **encouraging, instigating, promoting or procuring** the crime to be committed.
    - [29] However, Martin J.A. then went on to consider this Court’s decision in ***Poitras v. R.***, [1973 CanLII 156 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1xv18){:target=" \_blank"} ... that a purchaser should not, by reason of the purchase alone, be found to be a party to the offence of trafficking. I agree with that conclusion.
    - [32] It must be emphasized that there is no legislative intention similar to that which exists for purchasers to be found for those who assist or act as agents for a purchaser. The activities of an agent for a purchaser or one who assists a purchaser to buy narcotics certainly come within the definition of “aiding” or “abetting” under s. 21(1) of the *Code*. By bringing together the source of supply and the prospective purchaser, these persons obviously assist in the sale of narcotics. Acting as a spokesperson for a purchaser has the effect of assisting both the purchaser and the vendor to complete the transaction. It follows that **an agent for a purchaser or one who assists the purchaser** to buy the drugs can properly be found **guilty as a party to the offence of trafficking** under s. 21(1) of the *Code*. 
    - [37] Next it must be determined whether the appellant had the requisite *mens rea* or guilty mind to satisfy s. 21(b). In other words, in order to satisfy the purpose requirement under s. 21(1)(b), the Crown is required to prove only that **the accused intended the consequences that flowed from his or her aid to the principal offender**, and need not show that he or she desired or approved of the consequences.
    - [8] ... [D]espite his or her crucial assistance in helping to complete the sale of narcotics, the purchaser cannot by this action alone be found guilty of the offence of aiding or abetting the offence of trafficking. Frankly, **I see no reason why this reasoning should not be extended to third parties as well.** ... The proper charge in these circumstances would be aiding or abetting the possession of a narcotic, and not trafficking. 
    - [13] In the case at bar, however, I have no difficulty concluding that the **appellant did far more than act as a purchaser**. These are not the acts of a mere purchaser, and as a result it is clear that the **appellant aided the traffic of narcotics**. 

In ***R v Briscoe***, the Supreme Court of Canada expanded on the mental element of aiding and abetting.

!!! info "*R. v. Briscoe*, [2010 SCC 13](https://canlii.ca/t/29280){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - [7] The issue was whether each accused was involved and, if so, **whether criminal liability flowed from this involvement**. 
    - [13] The *actus reus* and *mens rea* for aiding or abetting, however, are distinct from those of the principal offence. 
    - [14] The *actus reus* of aiding or abetting is doing (or, in some circumstances, omitting to do) something that assists or encourages the perpetrator to commit the offence. 
    - [15] Of course, doing or omitting to do something that resulted in assisting another in committing a crime is not sufficient to attract criminal liability. ... The aider or abettor must also have the requisite mental state or *mens rea*. Specifically, in the words of s. 21(1)(b), the person must have rendered the assistance **for the purpose of aiding the principal offender to commit the crime**. 
    - [16] The *mens rea* requirement reflected in the word “purpose” under s. 21(1)(b) has two components: **intent** and **knowledge**. For the intent component, it was settled in ***R. v. Hibbert***, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 973, that **“purpose” in s. 21(1)(b) should be understood as essentially synonymous with “intention.”**
    - [17] As for knowledge, in order to have the intention to assist in the commission of an offence, **the aider must know that the perpetrator intends to commit the crime**, although he or she need not know precisely how it will be committed.
    - [18] The perpetrator’s intention to kill the victim must be known to the aider or abettor; it need not be shared. ***R. v. Kirkness***, [1990 CanLII 57 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fsqc){:target=" \_blank"} should not be interpreted as requiring that the aider and abettor of a murder have the same *mens rea* as the actual killer. It is sufficient that he or she, armed with knowledge of the perpetrator’s intention to commit the crime, acts with the intention of assisting the perpetrator in its commission. 

The facts in ***Briscoe*** bear some similarities to those in ***Dunlop and Sylvester v The Queen***. As you read ***Dunlop and Sylvester***, note that the dissenting judges adopt a different view of the evidence from that of the majority.

!!! info "*Dunlop and Sylvester v. The Queen*, [1979 CanLII 20 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1mkv8){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - To find that the accused is guilty of aiding or abetting the commission of an offence by another person, it is **only necessary to show that he understood what was being done and by some act on his part assisted or encouraged the attainment of that act**.
    - **Mere presence at the scene of a crime is not sufficient to ground culpability.** Something more is needed: encouragement of the principal offender; an act which facilitates the commission of the offence, such as keeping watch on [or] enticing the victim away, or an act which tends to prevent or hinder interference with accomplishment of the criminal act, such as preventing the intended victim from escaping or being ready to assist the prime culprit.
    - Presence at the commission of an offence can be evidence of aiding and abetting **if accompanied by other factors**, such as prior knowledge of the principal offender’s intention to commit the offence or attendance for the purpose of encouragement. ... A person cannot properly be convicted of aiding or abetting in the commission of acts which he does not know may be or are intended: *per* ***Viscount Dilhorne in Director of Public Prosecutions for Northern Ireland v. Maxwell***, [1978] 3 All E.R. 1140 at p. 1144 (H.L.).
    - A person is **not guilty merely because** he is present at the scene of a crime and does nothing to prevent it: Smith & Hogan, *Criminal Law*, 4th ed. (1978), p. 117. If there is **no evidence of encouragement** by him, a man’s presence at the scene of the crime will **not suffice to render him liable** as aider and abettor. A person who, **aware** of a rape taking place in his presence, **looks on** and **does nothing** is **not**, as a matter of law, **an accomplice**.

In ***R. v. Nixon***, [1990 CanLII 10993 (BC CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/g9cfp){:target=" \_blank"}, the accused was the senior officer in charge of the Vancouver police lockup. He was convicted of aggravated assault of a prisoner ... His appeal was dismissed by the British Columbia Court of Appeal,

> This case indicates something more than mere presence was needed. In the circumstances of the case at bar there was more than mere presence. **But assuming there was only mere presence, this case has one very important aspect that was not present** in ... the ***Dunlop and Sylvester v. The Queen*** case. That is the fact that Nixon is a police officer and has the obligation to protect his charges. He has that duty by legislation. He cannot say he was not involved. He was there, he had a duty to involve himself. 

> In some circumstances the **presence** of an accused will, **in itself, be held to have encouraged the commission of the offence**. In this situation there will be more than “mere presence” on the part of the accused and the accused will be liable as a party.

Apart from issues relating to the *actus reus* in various forms of participation by parties, there are also questions concerning the **mental element**. These issues were introduced in the extract from ***Briscoe***, which makes clear that the reference to purpose in s 21(1)(b) requires **intent** and that **wilful blindness could be substituted for the additional knowledge requirement**.

In ***R. v. Popen***, [1981 CanLII 3345 (ON CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/gb3r9){:target=" \_blank"}, the accused was charged with manslaughter of his infant daughter as a result of mistreatment on a number of occasions by his wife. The Ontario Court of Appeal sent the case back for a new trial. Justice Martin stated,

> Even if the appellant’s omission to take action to prevent his wife mistreating the child had the effect of assisting the wife, we are all of the view that there was **no evidence** upon which a jury could reasonably find that the appellant’s inaction was **for the purpose of assisting** his wife and there was, consequently, **no basis for the application of s. 21(1)(b)**.

> If the jury reached the conclusion that the appellant was criminally negligent in failing to take proper steps to protect the child, and that his criminal negligence contributed to her death, he would, of course, be **independently guilty of manslaughter**, as **distinct from being a party to his wife’s offence**.

**III. COMMON INTENTION**

When such a **common intention** is found, the accused will be held responsible for criminal acts that are a probable consequence of the common intention, if the accused **knew** or **ought to have known** that the **criminal acts were a probable consequence**. In ***R v Kirkness***, the Supreme Court considered the elements of liability under **s 21(2)**.

!!! info "*R. v. Kirkness*, [1990 CanLII 57 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fsqc){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - The first step in establishing liability under s. 21(2) is to show that the accused formed **an intention in common** with others to carry out an unlawful purpose and to assist them in achieving that purpose. **This common intention need not be pre-planned in any way.** It is sufficient, and the case law supports this proposition, that such intention arise just **prior to or at the time** of the commission of the offence.
    - Section 21(2) of the *Code* deems a party criminally liable for the acts of the principal offender **when the accused knew or ought to have known** of the probable commission of the acts which constitute the offence. There are two elements to this last branch of s. 21(2): 
        - (i) the commission of the ultimate offence has to be **probable**; and 
        - (ii) the accused **must know or ought to have known** of this probability. 
    - The two subsections of s. 21 deal with different circumstances. 
        - Subsection (1) applies to make everyone a party to an offence who commits it or who aids and abets in its commission. 
        - Subsection (2) covers the case where, in the absence of aiding and abetting, a person may become a party to an offence committed by another which he knew or ought to have known was a probable consequence of carrying out **an unlawful purpose in common with the actual perpetrator**.
    - I believe that, in order to be an offence “of the type” within the meaning of **s. 21(1)**, the committed offence must not only be similar but must be sufficiently contemporaneous with the contemplated offence. Section **21(2)** is, in my view, reserved for those instances where there has been a break in time between the two offences, and the **offence actually committed follows** after but as a consequence of the **offence originally planned**. 
    - Liability under s. 21(2) does not require the accused to assist directly in the act causing the death. It is sufficient, with certain limitations, that manslaughter was **a probable consequence** of the offence in which the accused aided or abetted.

In ***R v Logan***, the Supreme Court of Canada considered the **constitutionality** of the objective mental element in s 21(2) of the *Criminal Code* in relation to attempted murder.

!!! info "*R. v. Logan*, [1990 CanLII 84 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fssn){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - The appellant is challenging the constitutionality of s. 21(2) in general and, in particular, of the objective component of the section (“ought to have known”). 
    - In ***R. v. Vaillancourt***, [1987 CanLII 2 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fthw){:target=" \_blank"}, this Court held that for a few offences the principles of fundamental justice require that a conviction cannot stand unless there is proof beyond a reasonable doubt of **a minimum degree** of *mens rea*, and that legislation providing for any lesser degree violates the *Charter* and is inoperative. **Murder was one of those offences.**
    - With respect, I cannot construe ***Vaillancourt*** as saying that, as a general proposition, Parliament cannot ever enact provisions requiring different levels of guilt for principal offenders and parties. ... It must be remembered that within many offences there are **varying degrees of guilt** and it remains the function of the **sentencing process to adjust the punishment** for each individual offender accordingly. 
    - [T]he objective of [**s 21(2)**] is to deter joint criminal enterprises and to encourage persons who do participate to ensure that their accomplices do not commit offences beyond the planned unlawful purpose. This is a legislative objective of sufficient importance to **justify overriding the rights** of an Accused under s. 7 of the *Charter*.
    - **However**, with respect to the few offences for which the Constitution requires subjective intent, the stigma renders the infringement too serious and outweighs the legislative objective which, therefore, **cannot be justified under s. 1**. 
    - I would, therefore, as did the Court of Appeal, declare **inoperative the words “or ought to have known”** when considering under s. 21(2) whether a person is a party to any offence where it is a constitutional requirement for a conviction that foresight of the consequences be subjective, **which is the case for attempted murder**. 

**Chapter 10: INCHOATE OFFENCES**

This chapter is concerned with criminal liability for incomplete offences, of which there are three types having general application in Canadian criminal law: **attempt**, **incitement** (also called counselling), and **conspiracy**. They are described as **“inchoate”** because the full offences are not completed; like all criminal offences, however, they require proof of both a prohibited **act** and **fault**. 

There are two overarching questions of principle regarding the nature and outer limits of inchoate liability. 

- First, how does the criminal law mark the **boundary** between a **thought** to commit an unlawful act and **preliminary conduct** that attracts the legitimate imposition of the criminal sanction? 
- Second, when and how should the criminal law distinguish between **unsuccessful and successful efforts** to engage in criminal activity?

The inchoate offences of **attempt** and **conspiracy** are generally punishable with maximum penalties that are **half as high as** those of completed crimes (although **attempted murder is a notable exception**). The same is true for **inciting or counselling** a crime that is not committed.

**I. ATTEMPT**

A person who tries to commit a criminal offence but does not succeed can nevertheless be found guilty of attempting the offence if his or her conduct falls within the terms of **s 24** of the *Criminal Code*:

!!! warning ""

    **Attempts** 

    24(1) Every one who, having an **intent** to commit an offence, does or omits to do anything for the purpose of carrying out his intention is guilty of an **attempt** to commit the offence **whether or not it was possible under the circumstances to commit the offence**.

    **Question of law** 

    24(2) The question whether an act or omission by a person who has an intent to commit an offence is or is not **mere preparation** to commit the offence, and **too remote to constitute an attempt** to commit the offence, is **a question of law**.

**A. ACTUS REUS**

It is clear that there must be some act that **goes beyond preparation**, but what that is has often raised difficulty.

!!! info "*Regina v. Cline*, [1956 CanLII 150 (ON CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/g176x){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - The consummation of a crime usually comprises **a series of acts** which have their genesis in an idea to do a criminal act; the idea develops to a decision to do that act; a plan may be made for putting that decision into effect; the next step may be preparation only for carrying out the intention and plan; but **when that preparation is in fact fully completed, the next step** in the series of acts done by the accused for the purpose and with the intention of committing the crime as planned **cannot**, in my opinion, **be regarded as remote in its connection with that crime**. The connection is in fact proximate.
    - I state these propositions in my own words to guide me in the instant case: 
        - (1) There must be *mens rea* and also an *actus reus* to constitute a criminal attempt, but the criminality of misconduct **lies mainly in the intention of the accused**. 
        - (2) Evidence of similar acts done by the accused before the offence with which he is charged, and also afterwards if such acts are not too remote in time, is admissible to establish a pattern of conduct from which the Court may properly find *mens rea*. 
        - (3) Such evidence may be advanced in the case for the prosecution without waiting for the defence to raise a specific issue. 
        - (4) It is **not essential** that the *actus reus* be a crime or a tort or even a moral wrong or social mischief. 
        - (5) The *actus reus* must be **more than mere preparation** to commit a crime. But 
        - (6) when the preparation to commit a crime is in fact fully complete and ended, the **next step** done by the accused for the purpose and with the intention of committing a specific crime constitutes an *actus reus* **sufficient in law to establish a criminal attempt** to commit that crime.

!!! info "*Deutsch v. The Queen*, [1986 CanLII 21 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fts2){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - In my opinion the **distinction between preparation and attempt** is essentially a qualitative one, involving the relationship between the **nature and quality** of the act in question and the nature of the complete offence, although consideration must necessarily be given, in making that qualitative distinction, to the **relative proximity** of the act in question to what would have been the completed offence, in terms of **time**, **location** and **acts** under the control of the accused remaining to be accomplished.

**C. IMPOSSIBILITY**

Can a person be guilty of an attempt when completion of the offence is for some reason impossible?

!!! info "*United States of America v. Dynar*, [1997 CanLII 359 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fr0t){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - [1] The issue in this appeal is whether the respondent’s conduct in the United States would constitute a crime if carried out in this country, thereby meeting the requirement of “**double criminality**” which is the pre-condition for the surrender of a Canadian fugitive for trial in a foreign jurisdiction. This issue requires the Court to consider the scope of the liability for **attempted offences and conspiracy** under Canadian criminal law, specifically, **whether impossibility constitutes a defence to a charge of attempt or conspiracy** in Canada.
    - [50] In our view, s. 24(1) is clear: the crime of attempt consists of an **intent** to commit the completed offence together with **some act more than merely preparatory** taken in furtherance of the attempt.
    - [59] The only relevant distinction for purposes of s. 24(1) of the *Criminal Code* is between **imaginary crimes** and **attempts to do the factually impossible**. **The criminal law of Canada recognizes no middle category called “legal impossibility.”** Because Mr. Dynar attempted to do the impossible but did not attempt to commit an imaginary crime, he can only have attempted to do the “factually impossible.”
    - [64] Accordingly, there is **no difference** between an act thwarted by a “**physical impossibility**” and one thwarted “**following completion**.” Both are thwarted by an attendant circumstance, by a fact.
    - [65] There is, however, a relevant difference between a failed attempt to do something that is a crime and an imaginary crime. In the former case, the would-be thief has the *mens rea* associated with thievery. In the latter case, the would-be smuggler has no *mens rea* known to law. 
    - [67] Therefore, we conclude that s. 24(1) draws no distinction between **attempts** to do the possible but by inadequate means, **attempts** to do the physically impossible, and **attempts** to do something that turns out to be impossible “following completion.” **All are varieties of attempts to do the “factually impossible” and all are crimes.** Only attempts to commit imaginary crimes fall outside the scope of the provision.
    - [69] **Knowledge** therefore has two components, **truth and belief**, and of these, **only belief is mental or subjective**. **Truth is objective**, or at least consists in the correspondence of a proposition or mental state to objective reality.
    - [74] The **law of attempt is engaged** only when, as in this case, the *mens rea* of the completed offence is present entirely and the *actus reus* of it is present in an **incomplete but more than merely preparatory** way. 