---
layout: post
title: L525 Unit 4
date: 2026-02-14
draft: false
categories:
  - Law
tags:
  - LAW_V 525 99C 2025W2 Canadian Criminal Law and Procedure
  - Unit 4
---

#  Mental Fault (*Mens Rea*)

<!-- #### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">**Module Content**</p> -->

## 4.1 Introduction

As noted earlier, every criminal offence has both an *actus reus* (prohibited conduct) and *mens rea* (requisite mental state) component. This unit focuses on *mens rea* and the criminal law’s **objective** to only **punish morally blameworthy conduct**.

**Legislative Definitions of Fault**

The *Criminal Code* does not include a definition of the various types of mental fault, so this has fallen to the courts to interpret. Before we delve into that jurisprudence, it may be helpful to first consider some basic definitions of some of the **main types of mental fault** that have been proposed by various legal organizations.

**“True Criminal Offences” versus Regulatory Offences**

A true criminal offence involves conduct that is so abhorrent to basic values of human society that it must be prohibited completely (e.g. murder, sexual assault, fraud, robbery). Only the federal Parliament has jurisdiction to enact criminal offences (e.g offences in the *Criminal Code* and *Controlled Drugs and Substances Act*). **If the offence you are considering comes from one of these two statutes, you can be almost certain that you are dealing with a true criminal offence.**

On the other hand, regulatory offences involve conduct that is not inherently wrongful, but if it were unregulated it would present some danger to society. **Both the federal Parliament and provincial legislatures may enact regulatory offences within their respective areas of jurisdiction** (e.g. provincial health inspections of restaurants, federal air transport safety regulations).

It can be critically important how an offence is classified between criminal and regulatory. This is because each has **a starting presumption of the minimal level of *mens rea*** required.

## Textbook Summary: pp 413-416

**Chapter 6: FAULT OR MENS REA**

In Canada, there has long been a presumption of statutory interpretation that *mens rea* forms a part of all criminal offences. As Estey J explained in ***Gaunt and Watts v. The Queen***, [1953 CanLII 40 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/21v5s){:target=" \_blank"} at 511:

> It is a general rule that *mens rea* is an essential ingredient of criminal offences. ... While **an offence of which *mens rea* is not an essential ingredient may be created by legislation**, in view of the general rule a section creating an offence ought not to be so construed unless Parliament has, by express language or necessary implication, disclosed such an intention.

Just as long-standing as *mens rea* has been confusion regarding what it entails. As Stephen J observed in ***R v Tolson (1889)***, 23 QBD 168 (Ct for Cr Cases Reserved):

> It naturally suggests that, apart from all particular definitions of crimes, such a thing exists as a “*mens rea*,” or “**guilty mind**,” which is always expressly or by implication involved in every definition. **This is obviously not the case, for the mental elements of different crimes differ widely.** 

> In some cases it denotes mere inattention. For instance, in the case of manslaughter by negligence it may mean forgetting to notice a signal. **It appears confusing to call so many dissimilar states of mind by one name.** It seems contradictory indeed to describe a mere absence of mind as “*mens rea*,” or guilty mind. 

**I. LEGISLATIVE DEFINITIONS OF FAULT**

In Canada, there is no uniform definition of the fault requirements that apply to offences. For example, the *Criminal Code* does not include a comprehensive part (referred to by academics and law reformers as a “general part”) that provides definitions of commonly used fault-related terms, like “intention,” “knowledge,” “wilful,” “purpose,” or “criminal negligence.” The definitional enterprise is **left largely to the courts** to interpret terms on an offence-by-offence, term-by-term basis. 

## 4.2 Absolute & Strict Liability

We begin examining the various types of mental fault in detail by looking at the types of mental fault with the **lowest evidentiary thresholds** (e.g. those that are the easiest for the Crown to establish). These **absolute liability** and **strict liability** standards are **only applicable to regulatory offences**. Later, we will contrast these with the more onerous types of mental fault applicable to **criminal offences**.

**Absolute Liability**

Absolute liability involves **no mental fault** requirement whatsoever. The Accused is liable solely based on having committed the *actus reus* of the offence. A common example of an absolute liability offence is a parking infraction.

Regulatory offences were once presumed at common law to require no fault element (i.e. absolute liability). However, this presumption could be displaced with clear statutory language.

As some regulatory offences can involve the possibility of imprisonment, absolute liability means that someone could possibly be liable to imprisonment without any mental fault at all. This would mean that even an “accident” could give rise to the possibility of imprisonment. As we will see, such a possibility is **not allowed** under the *Charter*. However, **for those regulatory offences that do not involve the possibility of imprisonment, absolute liability offences do still exist.**

The pre-*Charter* decision in ***R. v. Pierce Fisheries Ltd.***, [1970 CanLII 178 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1xd31){:target=" \_blank"} demonstrates how absolute liability offences operate and some of the problems associated with them. It demonstrates how critical the classification is of an offence as being a “true criminal offence” (presumed at common law to have subjective mental fault) or a regulatory offence (once presumed at common law to have no fault element, i.e. absolute liability).

In the decision in ***R. v. Wholesale Travel Group Inc.***, [1991 CanLII 39 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fsjf){:target=" \_blank"}, Justice Cory of the Supreme Court of Canada articulates further on the distinction between true **criminal offences** versus **regulatory offences**, including their historical evolution, purposes and rationales, and the role of **moral blameworthiness** in them. 

**Constitutional Considerations**

In ***Reference Re B.C. Motor Vehicle Act***, [1985 CanLII 81 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/dln){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada held that this provincial regulatory offence that involved absolute liability violated section 7 of the *Charter*. It was not saved by section 1 of the *Charter* because it exposed the Accused to the possibility of imprisonment without any mental fault. In short, **“absolute liability and imprisonment cannot be combined.”**

**Strict Liability**

A new default standard of mental fault for such regulatory offences: “strict liability”. While it is a **low standard**, it does **involve a degree of mental fault**.

Strict liability means that once the Crown prosecutor has proven the *actus reus* of the offence **beyond a reasonable doubt**, the burden then shifts to the Accused to prove on **a balance of probabilities** that they exercised “**due diligence**” (e.g. took the steps that a reasonable person in the circumstances would have done).

In ***R. v. Sault Ste. Marie***, [1978 CanLII 11 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1mkbt){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada recognized for the first time that “**strict liability**” should be presumed at common law to be the **default level of mental fault for regulatory offences**. It bridges the gap between no fault requirement (absolute liability) and “full *mens rea*” (for criminal offences).

In ***Lévis (City) v. Tétreault; Lévis (City) v. 2629-4470 Québec inc.***, [2006 SCC 12](https://canlii.ca/t/1n0zk){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada affirmed the decision in ***R. v. City of Sault Ste. Marie*** and indicated that while it is still possible to have absolute liability offences if there is “clear proof of legislative intent”, such offences are now quite rare.

**Full Mens Rea**

Although **regulatory offences** are presumed to be strict liability, they are **capable of requiring “full *mens rea*”** as would a true criminal offence. 

This occurs when the otherwise regulatory provision has **express language** requiring a higher level of mental fault. For example, the provision might require that the Accused commit the act “**knowingly**”, or with “**intent**” or “**purpose**”. 

## Textbook Summary: pp 471-475, 483-490, 491-495

**Chapter 7: REGULATORY OFFENCES AND ABSOLUTE AND STRICT LIABILITY**

**Regulatory offences** can be enacted by **all levels of government** in the discharge of their regulatory duties over safety, the environment, and a wide range of other subjects. They far **out-number crimes enacted by the federal Parliament** in its exclusive jurisdiction to enact criminal offences.

**I. THE IMPORTANCE AND CONTEXT OF REGULATORY OFFENCES**

The following extract from Cory J’s judgment in ***Wholesale Travel Group Inc***, grapples with the distinction between “true criminal offences” and “regulatory offences.”

!!! info "*R. v. Wholesale Travel Group Inc.*, [1991 CanLII 39 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fsjf){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - **A. The Distinction Between Crimes and Regulatory Offences**
    - In ***Sherras v. De Rutzen***, [1895] 1 Q.B. 918 at p. 922, it was held that, 
        - while the *mens rea* presumption applied to true crimes because of the fault and moral culpability which they imply, that same presumption did not apply to offences “which ... are not criminal in any real sense, but are acts which in the public interest are prohibited under a penalty.”
    - This case illustrates the essential distinction in the legal treatment of regulatory as opposed to criminal offences, namely, the **removal** of the *mens rea* requirement. 
    - ***R. v. Sault Ste. Marie***, [1978] 2 S.C.R. 1299, affirmed the distinction between regulatory offences and true crimes.
        - such offences, although enforced as penal laws through the machinery of the criminal law, “are in substance of a civil nature and might well be regarded as a branch of administrative law to which traditional principles of criminal law have but limited application.” 
    - The ***Sault Ste. Marie*** case recognized **strict liability** as a middle ground between full *mens rea* and absolute liability. 
        - Where the offence is one of strict liability, the Crown is required to prove neither *mens rea* nor negligence; conviction may follow merely upon proof **beyond a reasonable doubt** of the **proscribed act**. 
        - However, it is open to the defendant to avoid liability by proving **on a balance of probabilities** that all due care was taken. 
        - This is the hallmark of the strict liability offence: **the defence of due diligence**. 
    - The new category of strict liability represented a **compromise** which acknowledged the importance and essential objectives of regulatory offences but at the same time sought to mitigate the harshness of absolute liability which was found, at p. 1311, to “violate” fundamental principles of penal liability.
    - **The Rationale for the Distinction**
    - The **objective** of regulatory legislation is to protect the public or broad segments of the public (such as employees, consumers and motorists, to name but a few) from the potentially adverse effects of otherwise lawful activity. 
    - While criminal offences are usually designed to condemn and punish past, inherently wrongful conduct, regulatory measures are generally **directed** to the prevention of future harm through the enforcement of minimum standards of conduct and care. 
    - Most recently, in ***Thomson Newspapers Ltd. v. Canada (Director of Investigation and Research, Restrictive Trade Practices Commission)***, [1990 CanLII 135 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fsz8){:target=" \_blank"}, at pp. 510-11, Justice La Forest:
        - [The regulatory offence] is not primarily concerned with values, but with results. ... The object is to induce compliance with rules for the overall benefit of society.
    - **B. The Fundamental Importance of Regulatory Offences in Canadian Society**
    - Regulatory measures are the primary mechanisms employed by governments in Canada to implement public policy objectives. In short, regulation is absolutely essential for our protection and well being as individuals, and for the effective functioning of society. 

**II. THE EARLY FAULT BINARY: ABSOLUTE LIABILITY OR SUBJECTIVE FAULT?**

!!! info "*R. v. Pierce Fisheries Ltd.*, [1970 CanLII 178 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1xd31){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - ... I am of opinion that the offence created by s. 3(1)(b) of the *Regulations* falls within the first class of exceptions referred to by Wright J., in ***Sherras v. De Rutzen***, ... and that it should be construed in accordance with the language in which it was enacted, free from any presumption as to the requirement of *mens rea*. 
    - In considering the language of the *Regulation*, s. 3(1)(b), it is significant, though not conclusive, that it contains no such words as “**knowingly**,” “**wilfully**,” “**with intent**” or “**without lawful excuse**,” whereas such words occur in a number of sections of the *Fisheries Act* itself which create offences for which *mens rea* is made an essential ingredient.

**III. THE EMERGENCE OF STRICT LIABILITY**

!!! info "*R. v. Sault Ste. Marie*, [1978 CanLII 11 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1mkbt){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - Although enforced as penal laws through the utilization of the machinery of the criminal law, the offences are in substance of a **civil nature** and might well be regarded as **a branch of administrative law** to which traditional principles of criminal law have but limited application.
    - Where the offence is **criminal**, the Crown must establish **a mental element**, namely, that the accused who committed the prohibited act did so intentionally or recklessly, with knowledge of the facts constituting the offence, or with wilful blindness toward them. **Mere negligence is excluded** from the concept of the mental element required for conviction.
    - In sharp contrast, “absolute liability” entails conviction on proof merely that the defendant committed the **prohibited act** constituting the *actus reus* of the offence. There is no relevant mental element. It is **no defence** that the accused was entirely without fault.
    - The unfortunate tendency in many past cases has been to see the choice as between **two stark alternatives**: (i) full *mens rea*; or (ii) absolute liability. ... There has, however, been an attempt in Australia, in many Canadian Courts, and indeed in England, to **seek a middle position**, fulfilling the goals of public welfare offences while still not punishing the entirely blameless. There is an increasing and impressive stream of authority which holds that where an offence **does not require full *mens rea***, it is nevertheless a good defence for the defendant to **prove that he was not negligent**. 
    - The correct approach, in my opinion, is to **relieve the Crown of the burden** of proving *mens rea*, having regard to ***Pierce Fisheries*** and to the virtual impossibility in most regulatory cases of proving wrongful intention. Equally, there is nothing wrong with **rejecting absolute liability and admitting the defence of reasonable care**. 
    - it is open to the defendant to prove that all due care has been taken. This **burden falls upon the defendant** as he is the only one who will generally have the means of proof. This would not seem unfair as the alternative is absolute liability which denies an accused any defence whatsoever. While the prosecution must prove **beyond a reasonable doubt** that the defendant committed the prohibited act, the defendant must only establish o**n the balance of probabilities** that he has a defence of reasonable care. 
    - I conclude, for the reasons which I have sought to express, that there are compelling grounds for the recognition of **three categories of offences** rather than the traditional two:
        - **Offences** in which *mens rea*, consisting of some positive state of mind such as intent, knowledge, or recklessness, must be proved by the prosecution either as an inference from the nature of the act committed, or by additional evidence.
        - **Offences** in which there is no necessity for the prosecution to prove the existence of *mens rea*; the doing of the prohibited act *prima facie* imports the offence, leaving it open to the accused to avoid liability by proving that he took all reasonable care. 
        - **Offences of absolute liability** where it is not open to the accused to exculpate himself by showing that he was free of fault.

As will been seen, the ***Sault Ste Marie*** compromise of strict liability formulated in 1978 was challenged as inconsistent with the rights of the accused under the *Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms*. It has survived these *Charter* challenges, and the Supreme Court affirmed in 2006 that it would apply the “clear analytical framework and classification approach adopted in ***Sault Ste. Marie***” (at para 19) and that while “**absolute liability** offences still exist ... they have become an **exception** requiring clear proof of legislative intent” (at para 17). ***Lévis (City) v. Tétreault; Lévis (City) v. 2629-4470 Québec inc.***, [2006 SCC 12](https://canlii.ca/t/1n0zk){:target=" \_blank"}. 

**IV. CONSTITUTIONAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR FAULT IN REGULATORY OFFENCES**

!!! info "*Re B.C. Motor Vehicle Act*, [1985 CanLII 81 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/dln){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - A law that has the potential to convict a person who has not really done anything wrong offends the principles of fundamental justice and, if imprisonment is available as a penalty, such a law then violates a person’s right to liberty under s. 7 of the *Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms* (Part I of the *Constitution Act*, 1982, as enacted by the *Canada Act*, 1982 (U.K.), c. 11). In other words, **absolute liability and imprisonment cannot be combined**.
    - It has from time immemorial been part of our system of laws that the innocent not be punished. It is so old that its first enunciation was in Latin ***actus non facit reum nisi mens sit rea***.
    - A law enacting an **absolute liability** offence will violate s. 7 of the *Charter* **only if** and to the extent that it has the potential of **depriving of life, liberty, or security of the person**. 
    - ... no imprisonment may be imposed for an absolute liability offence, and, consequently, given the question put to us, an offence punishable by imprisonment cannot be an absolute liability offence. 
    - ... absolute liability does not *per se* violate s. 7 of the *Charter* ... in penal law, absolute liability always offends the **principles of fundamental justice** irrespective of the nature of the offence; it offends s. 7 of the *Charter* if as a result, anyone is deprived of his life, liberty or security of the person, irrespective of the requirement of public interest. In such cases it might only be salvaged for reasons of public interest under s. 1. 
    - **Comment:** The Court subsequently held that **corporations do not enjoy s 7 rights** in ***Irwin Toy Ltd. v. Quebec (Attorney General)***, [1989 CanLII 87 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1ft6g){:target=" \_blank"}. At the same time, corporations charged with an offence that also applies to natural persons can still challenge the offence under s 7 as well as other rights under the *Charter*. That is why a corporation was able to challenge regulatory offences under s 7 of the *Charter* in ***R. v. Wholesale Travel Group Inc.***, [1991 CanLII 39 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fsjf){:target=" \_blank"}. Note that the rights in **s 11** of the *Charter*, including the presumption of innocence in s 11(d) of the *Charter*, **apply to all** those charged with an offence, including corporations.

## 4.3 Subjective vs. Objective Fault

Four different types of “**subjective fault**” (often referred to simply as *mens rea*): **intention**, **recklessness**, **knowledge**, and **wilful blindness**.

**Subjective Mental Fault**

**“Subjective fault”** means that the Accused themselves actually had the requisite degree of mental fault at the time they engaged in the prohibited conduct. 

When analysing subjective fault, the focus is on what was in the Accused’s mind at the time of the offence. This can be proven through **direct evidence** (e.g. **an admissible confession** by the Accused stating that knew the victim was a police officer), but more often it is proven by **indirect or circumstantial evidence** where inferences lead to that conclusion (e.g. the victim was in full police uniform so that it can be inferred that the Accused knew he was a police officer).

In contrast, **“objective fault”**, does not ask what was going on in the mind of the Accused. Instead, the Accused’s behaviour is compared to what a “reasonable person” would have done or known in the circumstances.

The **means** by which subjective states of mental fault can be proven can be confusing. The decisions excerpted in these readings provide some valuable guidance.

***Regina v. Buzzanga and Durocher***, [1979 CanLII 1927 (ON CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/g181w){:target=" \_blank"}:

> if a person does **an act likely to produce certain consequences** it is, in general, reasonable to assume that the Accused foresaw the probable consequences of his act and if he, nevertheless, acted so as to produce those consequences, that he intended them.

***Regina v. Tennant and Naccarato***, [1975 CanLII 605 (ON CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/g17dv){:target=" \_blank"}: 

> what **a reasonable man ought to have anticipated** is merely evidence from which a conclusion may be drawn that the Accused anticipated the same consequences.

In applying these principles, however, care must be taken not to equate subjective mental fault with objective mental fault. The **focus** remains on what the Accused him/herself **thought or knew**.

## Textbook Summary: pp 419

**III. SUBJECTIVE STANDARDS OF FAULT**

Subjective fault standards are traditionally most common in Canadian criminal law. However, merely because subjective fault is a formal requirement for an offence does not mean that objective considerations are irrelevant. 

**What a reasonable person would have realized or known** may be of value in the determination of what the accused actually thought. 

!!! info "*Regina v. Buzzanga and Durocher*, [1979 CanLII 1927 (ON CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/g181w){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - Since people are usually able to foresee the consequences of their acts, if a person does an act **likely to produce certain consequences** it is, in general, reasonable to assume that the accused also foresaw the probable consequences of his act and if he, nevertheless, acted so as to produce those consequences, that he intended them. 
    - The **greater** the likelihood of the relevant consequences ensuing from the accused’s act, the **easier** it is to draw the inference that he intended those consequences. 
    - The accused’s testimony, if he gives evidence as to what was in his mind, is important material to be weighed with the other evidence in determining whether the necessary intent has been established. Indeed, Mr. Justice Devlin, in his charge to the jury in ***R. v. Adams*** (*The Times*, April 10, 1957), said that where the accused testified as to what was in his mind and the jury “thought he might be telling the truth,” they would “have the best evidence available on what was in his own mind.”

## 4.4 Intention & Recklessness

**Intention**

Intention generally refers to the Accused’s conscious choice to engage in the prohibited conduct (i.e. they mean to engage in such conduct) and, if applicable, that they mean to cause the prohibited consequence.

In these readings, we find a helpful distinction between **intent** (which is the most onerous type of subjective mental fault for Crown to prove) and **motive** (**which is generally not required to be proven**, absent express statutory language). In ***Lewis v. The Queen***, [1979 CanLII 19 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1mkv6){:target=" \_blank"}, Chief Justice Dickson describes intent as “**the exercise of a free will to use particular means to produce a particular result**”, whereas motive is “that **which precedes and induces the exercise of will**”. Think of intention as being **what** the Accused meant to do, and of motive as being **why** the Accused chose to do it.

In several sections of the Criminal Code, Parliament goes so far as to specifically state that the Accused’s motive for a particular crime is irrelevant (and **no excuse for his/her actions**). See: s.163 **Corrupting Morals**, 162.1 **Publication of an Intimate Image Without Consent**, s.162 **Voyeurism**.

In ***R. v. Hibbert***, [1995 CanLII 110 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1frjf){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada interpreted the type of mental fault required for a person who aids an offence under section 21(1)(b) of the *Criminal Code*. The Court rejects the idea that the word “purpose” in this provision means “desire”. Instead, “purpose” is “understood as being essentially synonymous with intention”.

When you are evaluating whether a particular *Criminal Code* section requires intention as part of its *mens rea*, consider the following. 

- First, look to see if there is any **specific language** in the section such as “intentionally”, “with intent to”, “for the purpose of” or “wilfully”. Such words will usually precede a verb (the *actus reus*). Here are some examples from the *Criminal Code*:

    > s.244.2 (1) Every person commits an offence who intentionally discharges a firearm into or at a place, knowing that or being reckless as to whether another person is present in the place.

    > s.247 (1) Every one is guilty of an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, who with intent to cause death or bodily harm to a person, whether ascertained or not, sets or places a trap, device or other thing that is likely to cause death or bodily harm to a person.

    > s.273.3 (1) No person shall do anything for the purpose of removing from Canada a person who is ordinarily resident in Canada and who is under the age of 16 years, with the intention that an act be committed outside Canada that if it were committed in Canada would be an offence against section 151 or 152 or subsection 160(3) or 173(2) in respect of that person.

    > s.390 Every one is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years who wilfully makes a false statement in any receipt, certificate or acknowledgment for anything that may be used for a purpose mentioned in the *Bank Act*.

- Also consider what the *actus reus* is of the particular offence. Unless you are dealing with an objective *mens rea* offence, chances are that the Crown must prove that the *actus reus* was done intentionally.

***Regina v. Buzzanga and Durocher***, [1979 CanLII 1927 (ON CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/g181w){:target=" \_blank"} deals with the offence of wilfully promoting hatred under section 281.2(2) of the *Criminal Code*. It grapples with the role of motive and intention and provides some valuable insights into how to distinguish between the two concepts.

**Recklessness**

In cases where specific “intention” language is not use, recklessness may substitute in its place.

Whereas intention is concerned with what an Accused meant to do, recklessness exists where **an Accused is aware that his/her actions could result in a prohibited act or consequence, but s/he chooses to act anyways**.

Recklessness occurs when one “is aware that there is a danger that his conduct could bring about the result prohibited by the criminal law, nevertheless persists despite the risk.” It is “the conduct of one **who sees the risk and who takes the chance**” (***Sansregret v. The Queen***, [1985 CanLII 79 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fv0t){:target=" \_blank"}). 

There is a small **knowledge component** involved in recklessness, the knowledge that the behaviour one is engaging in has the potential to result in criminality.

In ***Sansregret***, the Supreme Court of Canada describes the concepts of **recklessness** and **wilful blindness** (discussed in our next topic) as **subjective types of mental fault**. The Court explains how recklessness involves the Accused being aware that there is a risk that his conduct could bring about the prohibited results, but nevertheless persists despite the risk.

## Textbook Summary: pp 421-429, 434-435

**A. INTENTION AND MOTIVE**

It is sensible to begin with an important distinction, one that is not readily apparent to the layperson: the difference between **motive** and **intention**. Justice Dickson summed up the key differences in ***Lewis v. The Queen***, [1979 CanLII 19 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1mkv6){:target=" \_blank"}.

!!! info "*Lewis v. The Queen*"

    - In most criminal trials, the mental element, the *mens rea* with which the Court is concerned, relates to “**intent**,” i.e., the **exercise of a free will to use particular means to produce a particular result**, rather than with “**motive**,” i.e., that **which precedes and induces the exercise of the will**. The mental element of a crime ordinarily involves **no reference to motive**.
    - ... a number of propositions.
        - (1) **As evidence**, motive is always **relevant** and hence evidence of motive is **admissible**.
        - (2) Motive is no part of the crime and is **legally irrelevant** to criminal responsibility. It is not an essential element of the prosecution’s case as a matter of law.
        - (3) Proved **absence of motive** is always an important fact **in favour of the accused** and ordinarily worthy of note in a charge to the jury.
        - (4) Conversely, proved **presence of motive** may be an **important factual ingredient** in the Crown’s case, notably on the issues of identity and intention, when the evidence is purely circumstantial.
        - (5) Motive is therefore always **a question of fact and evidence** and the necessity of referring to motive in the charge to the jury falls within the **general duty** of the trial Judge “to not only outline the theories of the prosecution and defence but to give the jury matters of evidence essential in arriving at a just conclusion.”
        - (6) Each case will turn on its own unique set of circumstances. **The issue of motive is always a matter of degree**.

The next case clarified this uncertain relationship between **motive**, **duress**, and **intention**, as well as the meaning of the word “**purpose**,” which is sometimes used to describe the culpable mental state necessary for criminal liability. In ordinary parlance, “purpose” is considered to be rather analogous to “motive” or “desire,” but, as shown in the following case, “purpose” does not necessarily have that meaning when used in criminal statutes.

**S 21 of the *Criminal Code*:**

> 21(1) Every one is a party to an offence who<br>
> (a) actually commits it;<br>
> (b) does or omits to do anything for the **purpose** of aiding any person to commit it; or<br>
> (c) abets any person in committing it.<br>
>
> 21(2) Where two or more persons form **an intention in common** to carry out an unlawful **purpose** and to assist each other therein and any one of them, in carrying out the common purpose, commits an offence, each of them who knew or ought to have known that the commission of the offence would be a probable consequence of carrying out the common purpose is a party to that offence.

!!! info "*R. v. Hibbert*, [1995 CanLII 110 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1frjf){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - As a practical matter, though, situations where **duress** will operate to “**negate**” *mens rea* will be **exceptional**, for the simple reason that the types of mental states that are capable of being “negated” by duress are not often found in the definitions of criminal offences. 
    - In general, a person who performs an action in response to a threat will know what he or she is doing, and will be aware of the probable consequences of his or her actions. Whether or not he or she **desires** the occurrence of these consequences will **depend on the particular circumstances**. 
    - The leading English case on the issue of whether **duress** negates the *mens rea* of parties to offences (under the common law governing party liability) is the House of Lords’ decision in ***Lynch***, supra. The view taken by the majority of the House of Lords in ***Lynch*** was that "**duress is a defence on its own, and does not negative either the doing of the act charged or the *mens rea*. This is plainly right.**"
    - In the absence of reason to believe that Parliament intended its enactment of s. 21(1)(b) to radically alter the common law principles governing party liability, the interpretation that accords with the common law would seem to also be the most likely to accurately embody Parliament’s intentions. Parliament’s use of the term “**purpose**” in s. 21(1)(b) should not be seen as incorporating the notion of “desire” into the mental state for party liability, and that the word should instead be understood as being essentially synonymous with “**intention**.”
    - I conclude that the expression “for the purpose of aiding” in s. 21(1)(b), properly understood, does not require that the accused actively view the commission of the offence he or she is aiding as desirable in and of itself. As a result, the *mens rea* for aiding under **s. 21(1)(b)** is **not susceptible of being “negated” by duress**.
    - As was the case with the term “purpose” in s. 21(1)(b), the phrase “**intention in common**” [in **s 21(2)**] is capable of being understood in more than one sense. One possible interpretation is that “intention in common” means **no more than that the two persons must have in mind the same unlawful purpose**. ... I have come to the conclusion that, in the context of s. 21(2), ... [it] is consistent both with Parliament’s intention and with the interpretation of s. 21(1)(b) I have adopted in these reasons.
    - The conclusions that can be extracted from the discussion in the previous sections may be summarized as follows:
        - The fact that a person who commits a criminal act does so as a result of threats of death or bodily harm can in some instances be **relevant** to the question of whether he or she possessed the *mens rea* necessary to commit an offence. Whether or not this is so will **depend**, among other things, on the structure of the **particular offence in question**, that is, on whether or not the mental state specified by Parliament in its definition of the offence is such that the presence of coercion can, as a matter of logic, have a bearing on the existence of *mens rea*. If the offence is one where the presence of duress is of potential relevance to the existence of *mens rea*, the accused is entitled to point to the presence of threats when arguing that the Crown has not proven beyond a reasonable doubt that he or she possessed the mental state required for liability.
        - A person who commits a criminal act under threats of death or bodily harm may also be able to **invoke an excuse-based defence** (either the statutory defence set out in **s. 17** or the common law defence of duress, depending on whether the accused is charged as a principal or as a party). This is so **regardless** of whether or not the offence at issue is one where the presence of coercion also has **a bearing on the existence** of *mens rea*. 
        - The mental states specified in **s. 21(1)(b)** and **(2)** of the *Criminal Code* are **not susceptible to being “negated” by duress**. Consequently, it is not open to persons charged under these sections to argue that because their acts were coerced by threats they lacked the requisite *mens rea*. Such persons may, however, seek to have their conduct **excused through the operation of the common law defence of duress**.


!!! info "*Regina v. Buzzanga and Durocher*, [1979 CanLII 1927 (ON CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/g181w){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - The threshold question to be determined is the meaning of “**wilfully**” in the term “wilfully promotes hatred” in s. 281.2(2) [see now s 319(2)] of the *Criminal Code*.
        - > 319(2) Every one who, by communicating statements, other than in private conversation, **wilfully promotes hatred** against any identifiable group is guilty of <br>(a) an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years; or <br>(b) an offence punishable on summary conviction.
    - As previously indicated, the word “**wilfully**” does not have a fixed meaning, but I am satisfied that in the context it means with the **intention** of promoting hatred, and does not include recklessness. ... since the inclusion of an offence in the *Criminal Code* must be taken to import *mens rea* **in the absence of a clear intention to dispense with it**: see ***R. v. Prue***; ***R. v. Baril (1979)***, 46 C.C.C. (2d) 257 at pp. 260-1, 96 D.L.R. 577 at pp. 580-1, 8 C.R. (3d) 68 at p. 73.
    - The general *mens rea* which is required and which suffices for most crimes where no mental element is mentioned in the definition of the crime, is either the **intentional** or **reckless** bringing about of the result which the law, in creating the offence, seeks to prevent ...

**C. RECKLESSNESS**

As discussed in ***Buzzanga and Durocher***, **recklessness** often forms the** minimal subjective fault** that can be read into offences that contain no explicit fault requirement. In ***Sansregret***, the Supreme Court discussed **recklessness** and **its relation to wilful blindness**.

!!! info "*Sansregret v. The Queen*, [1985 CanLII 79 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fv0t){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - **Negligence**, the failure to take reasonable care, is a creature of the civil law and is not generally a concept having a place in determining criminal liability. Nevertheless, it is frequently confused with **recklessness** in the criminal sense and care should be taken to separate the **two concepts**. 
        - **Negligence** is tested by the **objective standard of the reasonable man**. A departure from his accustomed sober behaviour by an act or omission which reveals less than reasonable care will involve liability at civil law but forms no basis for the imposition of criminal penalties. 
        - In accordance with well-established principles for the determination of criminal liability, **recklessness**, to form a part of the criminal *mens rea*, **must have an element of the subjective**. It is found in the attitude of one who, aware that there is danger that his conduct could bring about the result prohibited by the criminal law, **nevertheless persists**, despite the risk. It is, in other words, **the conduct of one who sees the risk and who takes the chance**. It is in this sense that the term “recklessness” is used in the criminal law and it is clearly distinct from the concept of civil negligence.
    - The idea of **wilful blindness** in circumstances such as this has been said to be an aspect of **recklessness**. While this may well be true, it is wise to keep the two concepts separate because they result from different mental attitudes and lead to different legal results. 
        - A finding of **recklessness** in this case could **not override the defence of mistake of fact**. 
        - On the other hand, a finding of **wilful blindness** as to the very facts about which the honest belief is now asserted would leave **no room for the application of the defence** because, where wilful blindness is shown, the law **presumes knowledge on the part of the accused**. 
    - Wilful blindness is distinct from recklessness because, while **recklessness involves knowledge of a danger or risk and persistence in a course of conduct** which creates a risk that the prohibited result will occur, **wilful blindness** arises where a person who has become aware of the need for some inquiry **declines to make the inquiry because he does not wish to know the truth**. He would prefer to remain ignorant. 
        - The culpability in recklessness is **justified by** consciousness of the risk and by proceeding in the face of it, 
        - while in wilful blindness it is **justified by** the accused’s fault in deliberately failing to inquire when he knows there is reason for inquiry.

## 4.5 Knowledge & Willful Blindness

**Knowledge**

Knowledge generally requires a **“true belief”** in a certain state of affairs. For example, if someone is charged with assaulting a police officer, they must have known at the time that the victim was a police officer. Usually (but not always) an Accused must have knowledge of each essential element of the crime to have the requisite *mens rea* for the crime.

The following are some examples where **knowledge** is needed as **a subjective form of *mens rea***.

!!! example ""

    **Assisting alien enemy to leave Canada, or omitting to prevent treason** <br>**s.50 (1)** Every one commits an offence who ... incites or wilfully assists a subject of a state that is at war with Canada ... **knowing** that a person is about to commit high treason ...

Here the Accused must know that the person he is assisting is about to commit high treason. We know this because of the specific language used in the section: “knowing”.

!!! example ""

    **Offences in relation to members of R.C.M.P.** <br>**s.56**  Every one who wilfully... assists, harbours or conceals a member of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police who he **knows** is a deserter or absentee without leave... is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

Again we have specific language in the section requiring knowledge. Here the Accused must know that the member is a deserter or absentee without leave.

!!! example ""

    **Possession, etc., of counterfeit money** <br>**s.450**  Every one who... has in his custody or possession... counterfeit money is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years.

This section is a bit trickier because it doesn’t use specific language indicating knowledge is required. However, it is an essential element of this offence that the money possessed by the Accused be **counterfeit**. **The Accused must therefore know** (knowledge) that the money was counterfeit (or be wilfully blind to the fact – see below).

**Wilful Blindness / Deliberate Ignorance**

In ***Sansregret v. The Queen***, [1985 CanLII 79 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fv0t){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada describes how willful blindness:

> ...arises where a person who has become aware of the need for some inquiry [but not a risk] declines to make the inquiry because he does not wish to know the truth”; “fault is deliberately failing to inquire where he knows there is a reason for inquiry.

Importantly, the Court holds that if an offence **requires knowledge** on the part of an Accused, this can be satisfied by **proving that the Accused was wilfully blind**. Note how this is different from intention and recklessness. If a *Criminal Code* section uses specific language requiring intention, then recklessness cannot substitute. **Willful blindness, however, can always substitute in for knowledge**, ==even if the *Code* section specifies that the Accused do something “knowingly”.==

In ***R. v. Briscoe***, [2010 SCC 13](https://canlii.ca/t/29280){:target=" \_blank"}, **Justice Charron** for the majority of the Supreme Court of Canada describes wilful blindness not as a type of mental fault, but as a

> a “**doctrine that imputes knowledge to an Accused** whose suspicion is aroused to the point where he or she sees the need for further inquiries, but deliberately chooses not to make those inquiries”.

The key question, she says is “Did the Accused shut his eyes because he knew or strongly suspected that looking would fix him with knowledge?” If so, the Accused is **deemed to have had knowledge**. This decision is also important because it introduces the difference between wilful blindness and the objective fault level of criminal negligence, which we consider in the next topic.

## Textbook Summary: pp 433-434

**B. WILFUL BLINDNESS**

A state of wilful blindness, although controversial and sometimes confused with negligence, has been recognized as a form of fault equivalent to knowledge.

!!! info "*R. v. Briscoe*, [2010 SCC 13](https://canlii.ca/t/29280){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - [21] ==Wilful blindness does not define the *mens rea* required for particular offences. Rather, it can **substitute for actual knowledge** whenever knowledge is a component of the *mens rea*.== The doctrine of wilful blindness imputes knowledge to an accused whose suspicion is aroused to the point where he or she sees the need for further inquiries, but deliberately chooses not to make those inquiries. 
    - [24] ... While a failure to inquire may be evidence of **recklessness** or **criminal negligence**, as for example, where a failure to inquire is a marked departure from the conduct expected of a reasonable person, wilful blindness is **not simply a failure to inquire** but, to repeat Professor Stuart’s words, **“deliberate ignorance.”** 
    - [25] ... whether Mr. Briscoe had the requisite *mens rea* for the three offences was a question for the trier of fact, and Mr. Briscoe is **entitled to the benefit of any reasonable doubt on this issue**. However, from a legal standpoint, it is my respectful view that the evidence cried out for an analysis on **wilful blindness**. In these circumstances, the Court of Appeal rightly concluded that the trial judge’s failure to consider Mr. Briscoe’s knowledge from that perspective constitutes a legal error which necessitates a new trial on all charges.

## Discussion Activity:  Identifying the *Actus Reus* & *Mens Rea* that Crown Must Prove

Please choose one of the simplified *Criminal Code* offences from the list below, and identify:

- (1) what the Crown must prove for the *actus reus* of the offence, and
- (2) what Crown must prove for the *mens rea* of the offence.

There is no requirement to comment on another student's post for this one.

List to choose from:

- **398** Every one who, with intent to deceive, falsifies an employment record by any means, including the punching of a time clock, is guilty of an offence.
- **76** Every one who, unlawfully, by force or threat thereof, seizes or exercises control of an aircraft with intent to cause any person on board the aircraft to be confined or imprisoned against his will, is guilty of an offence.
- **173(1)** Everyone who wilfully does an indecent act in a public place in the presence of one or more persons, or in any place with intent to insult or offend any person, is guilty of an offence.
- **184(1)** Every person who, by means of any electro-magnetic, acoustic, mechanical or other device, knowingly intercepts a private communication is guilty of an offence.
- **131**  Every one commits perjury who, with intent to mislead, makes a false statement under oath or solemn affirmation, by affidavit, or orally, knowing that the statement is false.

!!! example "Here is an example of how to approach this exercise"

    - **Methodology:**
    - (1) ==Identify the ***actus reus*** components== - the act, circumstances and consequences
        - **ACT**: What must the person physically do (or not do)?
        - **CIRCUMSTANCES**:  What set of facts must be present for the offence to be made out?
        - **CONSEQUENCES**:  Only some offences have these.  Does something (ie, death) have to result from the Act?
    - (2) ==Identify the ***mens rea*** Components== - Intention/Recklessness and Knowledge/WB
        - First look for any specific intention or knowledge language in the section and make note of it - such as "**wilfully**" or "**knowingly**."
        - Then start with the **ACT** from above.   Usually this Act has to be done **intentionally**. Sometimes the offence specifies that it has to be done intentionally, with language such as "wilfully".  If you see this language, **make sure it is attaching to the ACT** and not something else.  If, and only if, there isn't any language requiring the Act to be done intentionally, then **Recklessness** can substitute.
        - Next look at the **CIRCUMSTANCES** from above.  Generally the Accused must have **Knowledge or WB** of these required circumstances.  Note how Knowledge and WB **always** go hand in hand.  WB always applies to knowledge requirements.  Even if there is specific language that the Accused must "knowingly" do something, WB will still apply (unlike Recklessness above).
        - Finally, if there are required **CONSEQUENCES** usually accused must **intend** consequences or, if there is no specific intention language attached to the Consequences specifically, be **Reckless** about bringing them about.
    - **Example:**
    - **56** Every one who **willfully aids, assists, harbours or conceals** a member of the RCMP who he knows is a deserter or absentee without leave,
        - **Act** - to aid, assist, harbor or conceal
        - **Circ** - a member of the RCMP
        - **Circ** - knowing they are a deserter or absentee without leave
        - **INTENTION** to aid, assist, harbor or conceal
        - **RECKLESSNESS** would not apply because intention is specified in the section
        - **KNOWLEDGE or WB** that the concealed person is a member of the RCMP
        - **KNOWLEDGE or WB** that the concealed person is a deserter or absentee without leave

!!! quote "Answer"

    **131** Every one commits perjury who, with intent to mislead, makes a false statement under oath or solemn affirmation, by affidavit, or orally, knowing that the statement is false.

    **Act:** makes a false statement<br>
    **Circumstances:** under oath or solemn affirmation<br>
    **Circumstances:** by affidavit, or orally<br>
    **Intention:** with intent to mislead<br>
    **RECKLESSNESS:** N/A<br>
    **Knowledge or WB:** knowing that the statement is false

## 4.6 Criminal Negligence

**Introduction**

Now that we have completed our study of subjective mental fault, we can turn our minds to the topic of **objective mental fault** for a criminal offence, known as **criminal negligence**. This is a less onerous type of *mens rea* for Crown to prove.

Objective mental fault falls short of a “purely subjective inquiry” into what the Accused actually thought about, and instead considers what he or she **should have contemplated or ought to have perceived**. Such standards consider what a fictitious **“reasonable person”** would have thought, known or done in the circumstances. 

One clue as to whether an offence only requires objective mental fault is the use of the words “**ought**” or “**negligence**” in the language of the offence. The following are few examples from the *Criminal Code* of offences with an objective *mens rea* requirement.

> **Arson by Negligence**<br> 
> **s.436(1)** Every person who owns, in whole or in part, or controls property is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years where, as a result of a marked departure from the standard of care that **a reasonably prudent person** would use to prevent or control the spread of fires or to prevent explosions, that person is a cause of a fire or explosion in that property that causes bodily harm to another person or damage to property.

> **Criminal negligence**<br>
> **s.219(1)** Every one is criminally negligent who<br>
> (a) in doing anything, or<br>
> (b) in omitting to do anything that it is his duty to do, <br>
> shows **wanton or reckless disregard** for the lives or safety of other persons.

> **Failure or refusal to provide sample**<br>
> Everyone who commits an offence under subsection 254(5) and, at the time of committing the offence, **knows or ought to know** that their operation of the motor vehicle, vessel, aircraft or railway equipment, their assistance in the operation of the aircraft or railway equipment or their care or control of the motor vehicle, vessel, aircraft or railway equipment caused an accident resulting in bodily harm to another person is guilty of an indictable offence...

Objective standards of fault in criminal law are somewhat **controversial**, and may be **unconstitutional** in certain circumstances that we will explore later in this topic, because they reflect a lower degree of moral blameworthiness. They have been recognized for only a small category of offences, usually based on **explicit statutory language**.  

**Objective Mental Fault**

In ***R. v. Hundal***, [1993 CanLII 120 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fs58){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada interpreted the offence of **dangerous driving causing death** to have an objective standard of fault. In applying this standard, Justice Cory for the majority said: “**it will remain open to the accused to raise a reasonable doubt that a reasonable person would have been aware of the risks of the accused’s conduct.** The test must be applied with some measure of flexibility.” He added that **personal factors of the accused need not be taken into account**.

In ***R. v. Creighton***, [1993 CanLII 61 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fs09){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada considered the mental fault required for **unlawful act manslaughter**. The majority found that it required **objective foreseeability of the risk of bodily harm**, while the dissenting opinion held that **objective foresight of the risk of death** was needed.

The majority found that

> a person may be held criminally responsible for negligent conduct on the objective test, and that this alone does not violate the principle of fundamental justice that the **moral fault of the accused must be commensurate with the gravity of the offence and its penalty**.  

In terms of the applicable standard, the majority held that 

> considerations of law and policy dictate the maintenance of **a single, uniform legal standard of care** for such offences, subject to **one exception**: **incapacity to appreciate the nature of the risk** which the activity in question entails. 

In other words, **personal factors are generally not accounted for**.

The dissenting reasons of Chief Justice Lamer in ***R. v. Creighton*** are important because they set out the test under section 7 of the *Charter* for **when subjective mental fault is required (and objective mental fault would therefore not suffice)**. He makes the following key statements that have since been **adopted in majority reasons** of the Supreme Court of Canada:

- there is a general constitutional requirement that a mental element must relate to the consequences of an underlying offence where an offence is structured in that fashion” (e.g. **some mental fault element is required** for a criminal offence).[^1]
[^1]: We could already infer this from the ***Re B.C. Motor Vehicle Act***, [1985 CanLII 81 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/dln){:target=" \_blank"} from topic 3 in this unit since absolute liability cannot be combined with the possibility of imprisonment, and all criminal offences involve the possibility of imprisonment.

- there is no general constitutional principle requiring subjective foresight for criminal offences... an objective fault requirement is constitutionally sufficient for a broad range of offences other than those falling within the relatively small group of offences alluded to in ***R. v. Vaillancourt***, [1987 CanLII 2 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fthw){:target=" \_blank"}.

- there must be some **special mental element with respect to death** which gives rise to the moral blameworthiness which justifies the stigma and sentence attached to a murder convict” (this is referred to as the “**stigma/penalty analysis**”)

***R. v. Beatty***, [2008 SCC 5](https://canlii.ca/t/1vrp5){:target=" \_blank"} again deals with the offence of **dangerous driving causing death**. Justice Charron for the majority held that there must be a **“marked departure” from the standard of a reasonable person** for them to be criminally liable. She added:

> Where the accused raises a reasonable doubt whether a reasonable person in his/her position would have been aware of the risks arising from the conduct, the **premise for finding objective fault is no longer sound and must result in an acquittal**... analysis is thus contextualized and allowances are made for **defences such as incapacity and mistake of fact**... to ensure compliance with the fundamental principle of criminal justice that the innocent not be punished.

Further:

> Short of incapacity to appreciate the risk or incapacity to avoid creating it, **personal attributes** such as age, experience and education are **not relevant**. The standard against which the conduct must be measured is always the same, it is the conduct expected of **a reasonably prudent person** in the circumstances.

In ***R. v. Roy***, [2012 SCC 26](https://canlii.ca/t/frjlk){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada clarified the test in ***Beatty***, which had been criticized as conflating the *actus reus* and *mens rea* of dangerous driving. This case also demonstrates the importance of ensuring that all criminal offences, including those with objective mental fault, require proof beyond a reasonable doubt of both prohibited conduct and mental fault.

## Textbook Summary: pp 435-457

**IV. OBJECTIVE STANDARDS OF FAULT**

It looks at **standards of fault** that focus on holding accused persons to **an objective standard of conduct** and the **relation of such standards to subjective fault**. As you will read below, **two** such standards exist.

In ***R. v. Hundal***, [1993 CanLII 120 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fs58){:target=" \_blank"}, Cory J stating for the Court: 

!!! warning ""

    - The appellant contends that the prison sentence which may be imposed for a breach of s. 233 [now s 320.13] makes it evident that an accused cannot be convicted without proof beyond a reasonable doubt of a subjective mental element of an intention to drive dangerously. Certainly **every crime requires proof of an act or failure to act**, **coupled with an element of fault** which is termed the *mens rea*.
    - Although an objective test must be applied to the offence of dangerous driving, **it will remain open to the accused to raise a reasonable doubt that a reasonable person would have been aware of the risks in the accused’s conduct.** The test must be applied with some measure of flexibility. 
    - In summary, the *mens rea* for the offence of dangerous driving should be assessed objectively but in the context of all the events surrounding the incident. 
    - As a general rule, **personal factors need not be taken into account**. This flows from the licensing requirement for driving which assures that all who drive have a reasonable standard of physical health and capability, mental health and a knowledge of the reasonable standard required of all licensed drivers. 
    - In making the assessment, the trier of fact should be satisfied that the conduct amounted to a **marked departure from the standard of care** that a reasonable person would observe in the accused’s situation. 
    - Next, if an explanation is offered by the accused, such as a sudden and unexpected onset of illness, then in order to convict, the trier of fact **must be satisfied** that a reasonable person in similar circumstances ought to have been aware of the risk and of the danger involved in the conduct manifested by the accused. 


!!! info "*R. v. Creighton*, [1993 CanLII 61 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fs09){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - **A. The Objective Test**
    - An accused can only be held to **the standard of a reasonable person** if the accused was capable, in the circumstances of the offence, of attaining that standard. Consequently, in determining whether a reasonable person in the circumstances of the accused would have foreseen the risk of death arising from the unlawful act, the trier of fact must **pay particular attention to any human frailties** which might have rendered the accused incapable of having foreseen what the reasonable person would have foreseen. 
    - The rationale of incorporating **capacity into the objective determination of fault** is **analogous** to the rationale underlying the **defence of mistake of fact** in criminal law, where an accused who has an honest and reasonably held belief in an incorrect set of facts, and acts on the basis of those facts, is excused from punishment for the resulting harm.
    - I shall now turn to elaborating what “human frailties” may factor into the objective test. It is perhaps best to begin by stating clearly what is not included. **Intoxication** or **impairment** through drug use which occurs as a result of voluntary consumption cannot serve to vitiate liability for the risks created by the negligent conduct of an accused. 
    - Human frailties encompass personal characteristics habitually affecting an accused’s awareness of the circumstances which create risk. Such characteristics must be relevant to the ability to perceive the particular risk. It should be emphasized that the **relevant characteristics must be traits which the accused could not control or otherwise manage in the circumstances**. The reasonable person is **expected to compensate for his or her frailties**, to the extent he or she is conscious of them and able to do so.
    - **B. The Nature of the Objective Test** 
    - The *mens rea* of a criminal offence may be either subjective or objective, subject to the principle of fundamental justice ... 
        - **Subjective** *mens rea* requires that the accused have intended the consequences of his or her acts, or that knowing of the probable consequences of those acts, the accused have proceeded recklessly in the face of the risk. 
        - **Objective** *mens rea*, on the other hand, is not concerned with what the accused intended or knew. Rather, the mental fault lies in failure to direct the mind to a risk which the reasonable person would have appreciated. Objective *mens rea* is not concerned with what was actually in the accused’s mind, but with what should have been there, had the accused proceeded reasonably. 
    - The difference between our approaches turns on the **extent** to which **personal characteristics of the accused may affect liability** under the objective test. To date, debate has focused on whether an objective test for *mens rea* is ever available in the criminal law; little has been said about how, assuming it is applicable, it is to be applied.
    - In my view, considerations of principle and policy dictate the maintenance of **a single, uniform legal standard of care** for such offences, **subject to one exception**: incapacity to appreciate the nature of the risk which the activity in question entails. This principle that the criminal law will not convict the morally innocent **does not**, in my view, **require consideration of personal factors short of incapacity**. The criminal law,... has steadfastly rejected the idea that a person’s personal characteristics can (short of incapacity) excuse the person from meeting the standard of conduct imposed by the law. 
    - The foregoing analysis suggests the following line of inquiry in cases of penal negligence. 
        - The first question is whether *actus reus* is established. This requires that the negligence constitute a marked departure from the standards of the reasonable person in all the circumstances of the case. 
        - The next question is whether the *mens rea* is established. The *mens rea* for objective foresight of risking harm is normally inferred from the facts. **The standard is that of the reasonable person in the circumstances of the accused**. 
        - However, the normal inference may be **negated by evidence** raising a reasonable doubt as to **lack of capacity to appreciate the risk**. Thus, if a *prima facie* case for *actus reus* and *mens rea* is made out, it is necessary to ask **a further question**: did the accused possess the requisite **capacity to appreciate the risk** flowing from his conduct? If this further question is answered in the affirmative, the necessary moral fault is established and the accused is properly **convicted**. If not, the accused must be **acquitted**.

***Hundal*** and ***Creighton*** examined the permissibility of employing objective standards of liability and the requirements for objective fault. In doing so, they confirmed that **an objective fault standard** was required for cases involving **criminal negligence**: the Crown must prove the accused’s behaviour amounted to a **marked and substantial departure from the standard of care of a reasonable person** and, per **s 219**, that it exhibited a wanton or reckless disregard for the lives or safety of other persons. 

The objective fault standard was established in ***R. v. Tutton***, [1989 CanLII 103 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1ft5f){:target=" \_blank"}. The judges preferring objective fault stated (at 1430) that introducing an objective fault standard would serve to clearly delineate **offences of criminal negligence** from **ordinary criminal offences** that require proof of a subjective state of mind.

There is another form of objective fault, sometimes referred to as “**penal negligence**,” explored in the next two cases.

!!! info "***R. v. Beatty***, [2008 SCC 5](https://canlii.ca/t/1vrp5){:target=" \_blank"}"

    -  The question that divided the courts below was whether this momentary act of negligence was sufficient to constitute dangerous operation of a motor vehicle causing death within the meaning of s 249(4) (now s 320.13(3)) of the *Criminal Code*.
        
        > **320.13(3)** Everyone commits an offence who operates a conveyance in a manner that, having regard to all of the circumstances, is dangerous to the public and, as a result, causes the death of another person.
    - [6] ... Unquestionably, conduct which constitutes **a departure from the norm expected of a reasonably prudent person** forms the basis of **both civil and penal negligence**. Fundamental principles of criminal justice require that the law on penal negligence concern itself not only with conduct that deviates from the norm, which establishes the *actus reus* of the offence, but with the offender’s mental state. The onus lies on the Crown to prove both the *actus reus* and the *mens rea*. Moreover, where liability for penal negligence includes potential imprisonment, as is the case under s. 249 [now s 320.13] of the *Criminal Code*, the distinction between civil and penal negligence acquires **a constitutional dimension**. 
    - [7] The **modified objective test** established by this Court’s jurisprudence remains the appropriate test to determine the requisite *mens rea* for negligence-based criminal offences. It does so in two important respects. 
    - **First**, there must be a “**marked departure**” from the civil norm in the circumstances of the case. The distinction between a mere departure and a marked departure from the norm is **a question of degree**. It is only when the conduct meets the higher threshold that the court may find, on the basis of that conduct alone, a blameworthy state of mind. 
    - [8] **Second**, the modified objective test for penal negligence cannot ignore the actual mental state of the accused. Objective *mens rea* is based on the premise that a reasonable person in the accused’s position would have been aware of the risks arising from the conduct. **The fault lies in the absence of the requisite mental state of care**. **However**, where the accused raises **a reasonable doubt** whether a reasonable person in his or her position would have been aware of the risks arising from the conduct, the premise for finding objective fault is no longer sound and there must be an acquittal. 
    - [40] Some of the language used in ***Hundal*** nonetheless left uncertainty about the degree to which personal characteristics could form part of the circumstances which must be taken into account in applying the modified objective test. This remaining uncertainty was later resolved in ***Creighton***. Short of incapacity to appreciate the risk or incapacity to avoid creating it, personal attributes such as age, experience and education are not relevant.
    - [41] In ***Hundal***:
        
        > In making the assessment, the trier of fact should be satisfied that the conduct amounted to a **marked departure** from the standard of care that a reasonable person would observe in the accused’s situation. 
        >
        > Next, if an explanation is offered by the accused, such as a sudden and unexpected onset of illness, then in order to convict, the trier of fact must be satisfied that **a reasonable person in similar circumstances** ought to have been aware of the risk and of the danger involved in the conduct manifested by the accused.
    - I would therefore **restate** the **[modified objective] test** reproduced above as follows:
        - (a) The *Actus Reus*: The trier of fact must be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that, **viewed objectively**, the accused was, in the words of the section, driving in a manner that was “dangerous to the public, having regard to all the circumstances, including the nature, condition and use of the place at which the motor vehicle is being operated and the amount of traffic that at the time is or might reasonably be expected to be at that place.”
        - (b) The *Mens Rea*: The trier of fact must also be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused’s objectively dangerous conduct was **accompanied by the required *mens rea***. In making the objective assessment, the trier of fact should be satisfied on the basis of all the evidence, including evidence about the accused’s actual state of mind, if any, that the conduct amounted to a **marked departure** from the standard of care that **a reasonable person would observe in the accused’s circumstances**. 
    - **Determining the *Actus Reus***
    - [45] I deal firstly with the *actus reus*. The offence is defined by the words of the **legislative provision, not by the common law** standard for civil negligence. If the court is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the manner of driving was dangerous to the public within the meaning of s. 249, the *actus reus* of the offence has been made out. 
    - **Determining the *Mens Rea***
    - [47] As discussed at length above, the *mens rea* requirement for the offence of dangerous driving will be satisfied by applying a **modified objective test**. This means that, unlike offences that can only be committed if the accused possesses a subjective form of *mens rea*, it is **not necessary for the Crown to prove that the accused had a positive state of mind**, such as **intent**, **recklessness** or **wilful blindness**.
    - [48] Therefore, while proof of subjective *mens rea* will clearly suffice, it is not essential. In the case of negligence-based offences such as this one, doing the proscribed act with the absence of the appropriate mental state of care may instead suffice to constitute the requisite fault. The presence of objective *mens rea* is **determined by assessing the dangerous conduct as against the standard** expected of a reasonably prudent driver. If the dangerous conduct constitutes a “marked departure” from that norm, the offence will be made out.
    - [49] If the conduct does not constitute a marked departure from the standard expected of a reasonably prudent driver, **there is no need to pursue the analysis**. The offence will not have been made out.
    - **The Test for the Offence of Dangerous Driving**
    - [58] ... ***R. v. Hundal***, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 867, confirmed in ***R. v. Creighton***, [1993] 3 S.C.R. 3, indicates that the characterization of **“marked departure”** from the norm applies to the *actus reus* of the offence, and that the *mens rea* of the offence flows by inference from that finding, **absent an excuse casting a reasonable doubt on the accused’s capacity**. 
    - [72] A momentary lapse of attention without more cannot establish the *actus reus* and *mens rea* of the offence of dangerous driving. However, additional evidence may show that the momentary lapse is part of **a larger pattern that, considered as a whole, establishes the marked departure from the norm required for the offence of dangerous driving**. 
        - For example, a momentary lapse might be caused by the consumption of alcohol or by carrying on an activity incompatible with maintaining proper control of the automobile. The trier of fact might conclude in such a case that considering the total driving pattern in all the circumstances, a marked departure from the norm is established.

!!! info "*R. v. Roy*, [2012 SCC 26](https://canlii.ca/t/frjlk){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - [1] Dangerous driving causing death is a serious criminal offence punishable by up to 14 years in prison. Like all criminal offences, it consists of two components: **prohibited conduct**, operating a motor vehicle in a dangerous manner resulting in death, and **a required degree of fault**, a marked departure from the standard of care that a reasonable person would observe in all the circumstances.
    - [36] The focus of the *mens rea* analysis is on whether the dangerous manner of driving was the result of **a marked departure from the standard of care** which a reasonable person would have exercised in the same circumstances (***Beatty***, at para. 48). It is helpful to approach the issue by asking two questions. 
        - The **first** is whether, in light of all the relevant evidence, a reasonable person would have foreseen the risk and taken steps to avoid it if possible. 
        - If so, the **second** question is whether the accused’s failure to foresee the risk and take steps to avoid it, if possible, was a marked departure from the standard of care expected of a reasonable person in the accused’s circumstances. 
    - [38] The marked departure from the standard expected of a reasonable person in the same circumstances, **a modified objective standard**, is the minimum fault requirement. 

In ***R. v. Chung***, [2020 SCC 8](https://canlii.ca/t/j61fn){:target=" \_blank"}, a majority of the Court held that a momentary period of excessive speeding could satisfy the *mens rea* of **a marked departure** from the standard of care on a charge of dangerous driving causing death. 

The Supreme Court revisited the modified objective test in ***R. v. Javanmardi***, [2019 SCC 54](https://canlii.ca/t/j3bnw){:target=" \_blank"}. The accused was charged with criminal negligence causing death and unlawful act manslaughter. **Abella J** noted that the **marked departure standard** would apply to the unlawful act manslaughter charge, including in cases where the unlawful act or predicate offence was “one of strict liability.” **Justice Abella** then turned to the interpretation and application of the reasonable person standard from McLachlin J’s majority judgment in ***Creighton***, which defined the modified objective standard as that **“of the reasonable person in all the circumstances of the case.”** 

> [37] McLachlin J. explained [in ***Creighton***] ... that greater care may be expected of the
“reasonable person” on the basis of the nature and circumstances of the activity (p. 72). **Certain activities, for example, require special attention and skill**. An accused undertaking such an activity may be found to have breached the reasonable person standard if he or she is not qualified to provide the special care that the activity requires, or negligently failed to exercise such care while engaged in the activity. 

> [38] ***Creighton***’s activity sensitive approach to the modified objective standard has been
applied in a variety of contexts, including in cases involving driving, hunting and parenting (***Beatty***, at para. 40; ***R. v. Gendreau***, 2015 QCCA 1910, at para. 30 (CanLII); ***J.F.***, at paras. 8-9). These decisions confirm that while the standard is not determined by the accused’s personal characteristics, it is informed by the activity. 

> [39] An accused’s training and experience may, for example, be used to **rebut an allegation of being unqualified** to engage in an activity. Evidence of training and experience may also be used to **show how a reasonable person would have performed** the activity in the circumstances. 

## 4.7 End of Unit 4 Short Quiz

!!! danger "Quiz"

    1. What type of subjective mental fault (*mens rea*) is the **least onerous for Crown** to prove?
        - [x] Recklessness
        - [ ] Purpose
        - [ ] Criminal negligence
        - [ ] Awareness

    2. Recklessness means that a reasonable person in the circumstances would have been aware of a risk, but would have proceeded anyway.
        - [ ] True
        - [x] False

    3. Which of the following statements best describes the concept of **strict liability**?
        - [ ] Once the Crown proves the *actus reus* of the offence beyond a reasonable doubt, then the Accused is criminally liable.
        - [ ] Once the Crown proves the *actus reus* of the offence beyond a reasonable doubt, then the burden shifts to the defence to raise a reasonable doubt that due diligence (reasonable care) was exercised by the Accused.
        - [ ] The Crown is required to prove the *actus reus* of the offence and lack of due care and attention on the part of the Accused beyond a reasonable doubt.
        - [x] Once the Crown proves the *actus reus* of the offence beyond a reasonable doubt, then the burden shifts to the defence to prove on a balance of probabilities that due diligence (reasonable care) was exercised by the Accused.

    4. Which of the following cases recognized the constitutional principle that “**absolute liability and imprisonment cannot be combined**”?
        - [ ] ***R. v. Wholesale Travel Group Inc.***, [1991] 3 SCR 154
        - [ ] ***R. v. City of Sault Ste. Marie***, [1978] 2 SCR 1299
        - [x] ***Reference re Section 94(2) of the B.C. Motor Vehicles Act***, [1985] 2 SCR 486
        - [ ] ***Lévis (City) v. Tétreault***, [2006] 1 SCR 420

    5. Which of the following statements describes **wilful blindness/deliberate ignorance** in Canadian criminal law?
        - [ ] A court can properly find willful blindness only where it can almost be said that the Accused actually knew. The Accused suspected the fact, realized its probability, but refrained from obtaining the final confirmation because they wanted to be able to deny knowledge.
        - [x] It is a doctrine that imputes knowledge to an Accused whose suspicion is aroused to the point where he or she sees the need for further inquiries, but deliberately chooses not to make those inquiries.
        - [ ] A reasonable person would have been aware that there is a risk that his or her conduct could bring about the result prohibited, but nevertheless persists despite the risk by closing their eyes to that possibility.
        - [ ] None of the above.

    6. In ***R. v. Creighton***, [1993] 3 SCR 3, the majority of the Supreme Court of Canada found that “**a single, uniform legal standard of care**” was required for objective mental fault, subject to which of the following exceptions?
        - [x] Incapacity to appreciate the nature of the risk which the activity in question entails
        - [ ] Age
        - [ ] Human frailties
        - [ ] A generous allowance of factors taking into account the immutable characteristics of the Accused

    7. True or False: If a regulatory offence is **silent on the level of mental fault** that is required, it is presumed to be strict liability.
        - [x] True
        - [ ] False

    8. If a person does an act likely to produce certain consequences it is, in general, reasonable to assume that the Accused foresaw the probable consequences of his act and if he, nevertheless, acted so as to produce those consequences, that he intended them.
        - [x] True
        - [ ] False

