---
layout: post
title: L503 Module 4
date: 2026-01-27
draft: false
categories:
  - Law
tags:
  - LAW_V 503E E_99C 2025W2 Tort Law - Tort Law
  - Module 4
---

# Causation

!!! note "Readings"

    - Philip H Osborne, *The Law of Torts*, 6th ed. (Toronto: Irwin Law, 2020), pp 54-68
    - ***Snell v. Farrell***, [1990 CanLII 70 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fstw){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Athey v. Leonati***, [1996 CanLII 183 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fr63){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Cook v. Lewis***, [1951 CanLII 26 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/21v58){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Clements v. Clements***, [2012 SCC 32](https://canlii.ca/t/frvld){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Walker Estate v. York Finch General Hospital***, [2001 SCC 23](https://canlii.ca/t/522s){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Resurfice Corp. v. Hanke***, [2007 SCC 7](https://canlii.ca/t/1qfl8){:target=" \_blank"}

## Topic 1: Application of the "But for" Test and Cause-in-Fact

Before we begin, the text (at 54) refers to the need to avoid confusion between “cause-in-fact” and “proximate cause.” “Proximate cause”, or remoteness of damage, is a legal question left to the judge to determine and we will discuss it further in a subsequent module. Some lawyers combine “**causation**” and “**proximate cause**” into one element. However, the questions of cause-in-fact and proximate cause raise distinct issues, so it’s appropriate that we cover them separately.

**The Basic “But For” Test: Some Explanations And Comments**

The basic test for the **causation** element is “**but for**”: 

> But for the defendant’s negligent act, the plaintiff would not have suffered this harm. 

It is also known as “*sine qua non*”, i.e., “without which, nothing”. Here are some ways of putting it:

- Accident would not have happened without the defendant’s negligent act
    - Negligent act need not have been **sufficient** to cause harm on its own, but must be **necessary** for the harm to have occurred
- In other words: If the accident would have occurred just the same, whether or not the defendant acted, then the defendant is not a cause of the loss
    - Put another way: the defendant’s act must have **made a difference**

In most cases, there is no way to do a controlled experiment to determine causation with **certainty**. (This may be possible in rare cases, e.g., ones involving chemical reactions that can be replicated in a lab.) So courts make a **guess**, on the **balance of probabilities**, based on available evidence.

!!! info "General Comments"

    What is and is not enough to satisfy the test?

    - It is **not enough**:
        - that the defendant’s conduct “possibly” caused harm.
        - that the defendant’s conduct deprived the plaintiff of a chance to avoid injury. This is called “**loss of chance**” and the Supreme Court rejected it in the 1991 case ***Laferrière v. Lawson***, [1991 CanLII 87 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fslw){:target=" \_blank"} (see text at 66)
    - It is **enough**:
        - that the defendant’s conduct “probably” caused the harm. 
            - (where multiple forces contribute to an accident) if a person's negligence **substantially contributed** to an accident, it is also a cause of the accident. [Note that this is possible a cause of an accident by acting along with others, or by failing to prevent it. It is distinct from the “material contribution to risk test” which we will discuss below]
        - What about other causes of the harm?
            - **If the defendant can prove the injury would have happened anyway, regardless of the defendant’s negligent act, then causation is disproved.**

!!! danger "Module 4 - Topic 1: Practice Question"

    1. Select the option from the drop-down list that does not satisfy the "**but-for**" test:
        - [ ] defendant's action likely caused the plaintiff's harms
        - [x] defendant's action possibly caused the plaintiff's harms
        - [ ] defendant's action, beyond a reasonable doubt, caused the plaintiff's harms
        - [ ] without the defendant's action, the plaintiff would not have suffered his/her harms
    > In the "but for" test the court analyzes the evidence based on a **balance of probabilities**. In other words "but for" the defendant's actions, there is at least a **greater than 50% chance** that the plaintiff's harms would not have occurred. All the selections satisfy this requirement except for the defendant's action "possibly" causing the plaintiff's harms.

## Topic 2: Case Law Illustrating the "But For" Test

***Athey*** illustrates the effect of a plaintiff proving that two or more tortfeasors caused the harm. The defendants are “**jointly and severally liable**.” This means that each of them is **fully responsible** for the harm to the plaintiff. 

In this case, the liability was split 50/50 among the defendants, but that only matters to the defendants themselves. To the plaintiff it does not matter, since if only one defendant has any money at the time of judgement, that defendant will have to fully compensate the plaintiff. The defendant would then pursue the other defendant for half of the damages award. That is what “jointly and severally” means: **defendants jointly liable for the full amount, but, among themselves, able to divide up the damage award**.

!!! info "*Athey v. Leonati*, [1996 CanLII 183 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fr63){:target=" \_blank"}, headnote"

    - A defendant is liable for any injuries caused or contributed to by his or her negligence.  The presence of other non‑tortious contributing causes does not reduce the extent of that liability.  **Loss cannot be apportioned according to the degree of causation where it is created by tortious and non‑tortious causes**.
    - Causation is established where the plaintiff proves to the civil standard that the defendant caused or contributed to the injury.  **The general, but not conclusive, test for causation is the “but for” test**, which requires the plaintiff to show that the injury would not have occurred but for the negligence of the defendant.   **Where the “but for” test is unworkable, the courts have recognized that causation is established where the defendant’s negligence “materially contributed” to the occurrence of the injury.**   
    - In some circumstances an inference of causation may be drawn from the evidence without positive scientific proof.  The plaintiff need not establish that the defendant’s negligence was the sole cause of the injury.  **The law does not excuse a defendant from liability merely because other causal factors for which he or she is not responsible also helped produce the harm.**  It is sufficient if the defendant’s negligence was a cause of the harm.
    - **Apportionment between tortious and non‑tortious causes is contrary to the principles of tort law** because the defendant would escape full liability even though he or she caused or contributed to the plaintiff's entire injuries.  The plaintiff would not be adequately compensated, since he or she would not be placed in the original position he or she would be in  absent the defendant's negligence.
    - **Separation of distinct and divisible injuries** is not truly apportionment; it is simply making each defendant liable only for the injury he or she  has caused, according to the usual rule.  Separation is also **permitted** where some of the injuries have tortious causes and some have non‑tortious causes.  Again, **such cases merely recognize that the defendant is not liable for injuries which were not caused by his or her negligence.**
    - The plaintiff’s loss is the difference between the original position the plaintiff would have been in absent the defendant’s negligence and the plaintiff’s position after the tort.  Where a**n intervening event** unrelated to the tort affects the plaintiff’s “original position”, the net loss is not as great as it might have otherwise seemed, so **damages would be reduced to reflect this**.
    - The defendant need not put the plaintiff in a position better than his or her original position.  The defendant is liable for the additional damage but not the pre‑existing damage.
    - The **25 percent** contribution of the two accidents to the disc herniation assessed by the trial judge fell outside the *de minimis* range and therefore constituted a **material contribution** sufficient to render the defendant fully liable for the damages flowing from the disc herniation.   Notwithstanding the plaintiff’s back problems before the accident, it was reasonable to infer a causal connection (which was supported by the evidence) between the disc herniation and the two accidents.

!!! info "*Snell v. Farrell*, [1990 CanLII 70 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fstw){:target=" \_blank"}, headnote"

    - While proof of causation in medical malpractice cases is often difficult for the patient, it is unnecessary to adopt either of the alternatives arising out of the ***McGhee v. National Coal Board*** case, **namely**, that the plaintiff simply prove that the defendant created a risk that the injury which occurred would occur, or that the defendant has the burden of disproving causation, since, **properly applied, the traditional principles relating to causation are adequate to the task**.  Adoption of either of the proposed alternatives would have the effect of compensating plaintiffs where a substantial connection between the injury and the defendant's conduct is absent.  A plaintiff should not be compensated by reversing the burden of proof for an injury that may very well be due to factors unconnected to the defendant and not the fault of anyone.
    - Causation need not be determined with scientific precision.  In many malpractice cases, the facts lie particularly within the knowledge of the defendant, and very little affirmative evidence on the part of the plaintiff will **justify the drawing of an inference of causation in the absence of evidence to the contrary**.  It is not strictly accurate to speak of the burden of proof shifting to the defendant when what is meant is that **evidence adduced by the plaintiff may result in an inference being drawn adverse to the defendant**.  The legal or ultimate burden remains with the plaintiff, but in the absence of evidence to the contrary adduced by the defendant an inference of causation may be drawn although positive or scientific proof of causation has not been adduced.  
    - If some evidence to the contrary is adduced by the defendant, the trial judge should weigh that evidence according to the proof.  It is therefore not essential that the medical experts provide a firm opinion supporting the plaintiff's theory of causation.  **Medical experts ordinarily determine causation in terms of certainties whereas a lesser standard is demanded by the law.**  It is the function of the trier of fact, not the medical witnesses, to make a legal determination of the question of causation.

**How the Courts Deal with Uncertainty**

In our readings this week, ***Athey***, and ***Snell*** are all cases in which the “but for” test was applied. In cases that turn on the question of causation, there is negligence: the issue is whether that negligent act caused the harm.

***Snell*** is another case in which the court applied “but for” test. The defendant had argued that the plaintiff failed to prove causation. The plaintiff argued that it was impossible to prove causation, since he had been on the operating table at the time of the harm, and only the hospital staff who did the work could say what happened. But **Sopinka J.** whose area of specialty was the law of evidence, wrote a miniature textbook on inferring negligence, saying that **it won’t always take much to prove “but for” causation**.

***Athey*** is another miniature textbook. There, the Supreme Court goes through a series of arguments that the defendants made about causation. You should carefully read the arguments at **paras 21-36**, under the heading “Inapplicability of Respondents’ [Defendants’] Analogies”, since they explain many fine points about causation, as well as **proximate cause** and **thin vs. crumbling skull**. We will return to those latter points in a subsequent Module.

As the court says in ***Snell***, scientific certainty is not required. It is impossible to determine causation with 100% certainty in these types of cases.

## Topic 3: Case Law in which "But For" is Impossible

***Clements*** is also a “but for” case: in that one, the Supreme Court of Canada applied the “but for” test. However, the Supreme Court also established a rule for when an **easier test** is appropriate. That test is called the “**material contribution to risk**.”

Before we review the test, here is an explanation on the **rationale** for not using the “but for” test in certain situations:

- The circumstances make it **impossible** for the plaintiff **to prove causation** at the “but for” level, even by inference from circumstances(This can be due to the complicated facts, lack of willing witnesses, etc.)

*AND*

- it would be **unfair** for the plaintiff to go without compensation (and for the defendant to get away with not paying compensation),

*THEN*

- the courts are willing to **relax the test**. But only in narrow circumstances, as defined, now, in Clements.

Please take a moment and look back at ***Snell***. **Sopinka J.** says:

> If I were convinced that defendants who have a substantial connection to the injury were escaping liability because plaintiffs cannot prove causation under currently applied principles, I would not hesitate to adopt one of these alternatives [i.e., easier-to-prove tests of causation].

He is saying that a flexible application of “but for,” which allows the plaintiff to present enough evidence for the court to infer causation, avoids injustice.

However, ***Athey*** hinted that in some cases “but for” would lead to injustice. This alternative liability principle is adopted most clearly in ***Cook***. ***Fairchild v Glenhaven Funeral Services Ltd.*** [2003] 1 A.C. 32, mentioned in the text (at 61) is another such cases. In each, there was only one cause (in ***Cook***, one bullet; in ***Fairchild***, one fibre of asbestos), but two defendants who could have been the cause. There was no way for the plaintiff to prove which. Under “but for,” the plaintiff would lose.

Another such situation arose in ***Walker Estate***, which is mentioned in ***Clements***. In ***Walker Estate*** a man donated blood in 1984. He had HIV. The issue became causation: 

Would this donor have notified the clinic that he was in a high-risk group if he had received a better warning? 

- If so, his blood would have been tested, found to be unsafe, and not given to Ms Walker: causation. 
- But if he would have donated anyway, there is no causal link between the negligence (inadequate warning) and the harm.

!!! info "*Clements v. Clements*, [2012 SCC 32](https://canlii.ca/t/frvld){:target=" \_blank"}, headnote"

    - On its own, proof by an injured plaintiff that a defendant was negligent does not make that defendant liable for the loss.  As a general rule, a plaintiff cannot succeed unless she shows as a matter of fact that **she would not have suffered the loss “but for” the negligent act or acts of the defendant**.  
    - Exceptionally, however, a plaintiff may be able to recover on the basis of **material contribution to risk** of injury, without showing factual “but for” causation.  **Elimination of proof of causation** as an element of negligence is a radical step that goes against the fundamental principle that a defendant in an action in negligence is a wrongdoer only in respect of the damage which he actually causes to the plaintiff.  Therefore, recourse to a material contribution to risk approach is justified only where it is required by **fairness and conforms to the principles** that ground recovery in tort.  
    - The cases that have dispensed with the usual requirement of “but for” causation in favour of a less onerous material contribution to risk approach are **generally cases with a number of tortfeasors** where, “but for” the negligent act of one or more of the defendants, the plaintiff would not have been injured.  It is only when it is applied separately to each defendant that the “but for” test breaks down because it cannot be shown which of several negligent defendants actually launched the event that led to the injury.  In these circumstances, **permitting the plaintiff to succeed on a material contribution to risk basis meets the underlying goals of the law of negligence**.  

!!! info "*Cook v. Lewis*, [1951 CanLII 26 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/21v58){:target=" \_blank"}, headnote"

    - The jury found that the respondent had been shot by one of these two hunters but were unable to say by which one. 
    - once the plaintiff had proven that he was shot by one of the defendants the **onus was then on such defendant** to establish absence of both intention and negligence; and that if the jury found themselves unable to decide which of the two shot the plaintiff, because in. their opinion both shot negligently in his direction, **both defendants should be found liable**.

!!! info "*Walker Estate v. York Finch General Hospital*, [2001 SCC 23](https://canlii.ca/t/522s){:target=" \_blank"}, headnote"

    - The **O and M** actions in negligence were successful. 
    - The trial judge was entitled to find that the donor screening procedures of the **CRCS May 1984 pamphlet**, which was in use when the donor made his HIV-infected blood donations in **December 1984** and **March 1985**, were **inadequate** and to reject the opinions of the experts who testified on the issue.  The trial judge was not asked to assess complex scientific or highly technical matters.  The issue was **whether the general health question was sufficient to deter the infected donor from donating blood**.  The issue is not how an expert would respond to the donor screening question in the questionnaire, but how a lay person would respond.
    - the **W**'s action in negligence was succuessful.
    - In cases of negligent donor screening, it may be difficult or impossible to prove hypothetically what the donor would have done had he or she been properly screened by the CRCS.  In such cases, therefore, the question should not be whether the CRCS’s conduct was a necessary condition for the plaintiffs’ injuries using the “but-for” test, **but whether that conduct was a sufficient condition.**  The proper test for causation in cases of negligent donor screening is whether the defendant’s negligence “**materially contributed**” to the occurrence of the injury. In the present case, it is clear that it did.  
    - The plaintiff accordingly retains the burden of proving that the failure of the CRCS to screen donors with tainted blood materially contributed to W contracting HIV from the tainted blood. The problem with the **CRCS May 1984 pamphlet** is the focus on being in “good health”, a focus which the trial judge found to be **inadequate** in O’s case.  ... had the donor seen the **ARC 1983 pamphlet**, he would have been deferred or excluded from donating blood on **September 1983**.

!!! info "***Resurfice Corp. v. Hanke***, [2007 SCC 7](https://canlii.ca/t/1qfl8){:target=" \_blank"}, headnote"

    - There was evidence supporting his finding that H was not confused by the two tanks, notably H’s own admission, and the seriousness of H’s injury and the relative financial positions of the parties were not matters relevant to foreseeability.
    - With respect to causation, the trial judge did not need to engage in a **contributory negligence analysis** because he found, not only that H’s carelessness was responsible for his injuries, but also that the alleged design defects were not responsible for these injuries.  
    - **The basic test remains the “but for” test.**  This test ensures that a defendant will not be held liable for the plaintiff’s injuries where they may very well be due to factors unconnected to the defendant and not the fault of anyone.  
    - **The “material contribution” test only applies in exceptional cases where factors outside of the plaintiff’s control make it impossible for the plaintiff to prove that the defendant’s negligence caused the plaintiff’s injury using the “but for” test**, and the plaintiff’s injury falls within the ambit of the risk created by the defendant’s breach of his duty of care owed to the plaintiff.


The SCC clarified itself in a 2007 decision called ***Resurfice*** (also mentioned in ***Clements***), moving towards a clearer test for when a lower threshold than “but for” would be adequate. But ***Clements*** is the case that has established a formal, pretty clear rule.

That rule, or test, is stated succinctly in the text (at 60). The “**material contribution to risk**” test can be summarized as follows:

WHERE there are:

- **Multiple** (i.e. two or more) negligent defendants each of whom is responsible for the loss, **AND**
- Despite the plaintiff’s inability to prove causation against a member of the group, there would be no loss to the plaintiff **“but for” the negligence of defendants as a group**.

**THEN** the plaintiff can satisfy the burden of proving causation against all defendants in the group, despite the absence of “but for” causation against any one defendant.

The Supreme Court emphasized that the “material contribution to risk” test will replace “but for” only in the **rarest of cases**. The most obvious examples are the scenarios in ***Cook*** and the ***Fairchild*** case. And note that “but for” is still important in the test: **the group of defendants as a whole must be proved to have caused the harm at the “but for” level.**

> It is important to note that the Supreme Court of Canada, despite its development, discussion and evolution of the test, has (as of 2016) never in fact applied the "material contribution to rist test" to determine liability (see ***Clements*** at para 28).

!!! warning "*B.C. Negligence Act*, [RSBC 1996, c 333](https://www.bclaws.gov.bc.ca/civix/document/id/complete/statreg/96333_01){:target=" \_blank"}"

    - **Divisible** injuries, each with an independent cause:
        - Rule: Each tortfeasor (negligent defendant) is responsible only for the injuries that D caused.
    - **Indivisible** injuries (e.g., same injury or set of injuries) with multiple causes:
        - Rule: All defendants are **jointly and severally** liable, therefore liable to the plaintiff for the whole harm (see ***Athey***; and see ***B.C. Negligence Act***, s 4(2))
        - Rule: Tortfeasors jointly and severally liable for the full harm: no reduction in damage award due to non-tortious cause
        - If all causes are **tortious**, *i.e.*, 2 or more defendants whose negligence was necessary to cause the harm, and their contribution to the harm was at more than a minimal level (***Athey*** at para 44):
        - If there are **non-tortious and tortious** causes combined, all necessary for the harm to occur (all contributed materially to the harm):
        - If **non-tortious and tortious** causes are combined, but the **non-tortious cause** (e.g., a medical condition) was already causing the harm, or the harm was going to occur eventually anyway due to the non-tortious cause, the tortfeasor(s) will not have to pay full compensation (this is crumbling skull: see paras 34-36). **The defendant(s) pay only for the increase in harm** that the negligence caused. (See ***Athey*** at para 25: the lawsuit should not make the plaintiff better off than the plaintiff would have been if the negligence had not occurred.)
    - **Indivisible OR divisible injuries, but plaintiff also negligent**:
        - Rule: Several liability: *i.e.*, tortfeasors only liable to plaintiff for their **percentage of the fault**. The plaintiff is responsible for the rest.

Joint Tortfeasors are responsible for the same wrongful act even if only one of them actually committed the act. This applies only in **special circumstances**:

- **Encouraging or facilitating** another person to commit a tort results in both being joint tortfeasors;
- **Employee/Employer relationship** whereby the Employee commits a tort within the duties of his employment resulting in the Employer being a joint tortfeasor;
- **Principal/Agent relationship** whereby the Agent commits a tort within his authority (actual or apparent authority);
- Any other situation where **concerted action** by two or more individuals results in a tort being committed by one of them. As the text notes, guilt is established by participation, not merely by association.

<p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">**Joint and several liability:**<br>when multiple defendants are jointly and severally liable, **each of them is fully liable** to the plaintiff for the harm (that’s the joint part). The “several” part is that **among themselves they can divide up the payment**. It is up to the defendant who pays more than that person’s share to pursue the other defendants for their “contribution,” based on the percentages.</p>

!!! info "Example"

    The rules change if the **plaintiff is negligent**. 
    
    So in our imaginary scenario, let’s say that the plaintiff was 10% negligent, the first defendant 20%, the second 40%, and the third 30%. 
    
    In this case, the plaintiff could only hope to get 90% of the damages, **but more importantly, the plaintiff could only get each defendant’s percentage**. If defendants 1 and 2 are penniless, or take off for Fiji and leave no assets, the plaintiff is stuck going after the third defendant for a maximum of 30%. 
    
    This rule is in ss 1(1) and 2(c) of the *Negligence Act*.


!!! danger "Module 4 - Topic 3: Practice Question"

    1. The "material contribution test" is growing in usage and increasingly replacing the "but for" test for causation in Canadian court cases.
        - [ ] True 
        - [x] False 
    > In ***Clements v Clements***, the Supreme Court emphasized that the “material contribution to risk” test will replace “but for” only in the rarest of cases. The trial judge had applied “material contribution to risk” in ***Clements*** due to the absence of sufficient evidence for “but for.” On the facts in ***Clements***, despite the difficulty of proving the cause of the accident, the Supreme Court found that that “but for” was the right test, not material contribution.

## Topic 4: Causation Principles from Case Readings

**Loss of chance** as a distinct head of damage has not been adopted in Canadian law, although the unfairness principle of a rigid analysis is obvious in many of these cases, as noted in the text reference to ***Cottrelle v Gerard (2003)***, 233 D.L.R. (4th) 45.

**Instructor's comment on the cases:**

***Athey***:

- The basic argument (see para 12) was that the compensation should be divided among the defendants based on **degree of causation**. We touched on that issue earlier in the Module. As Major J says at para 12 that is not how it is done.
- The Court emphasizes at paras 17, 20 that a defendant’s negligence does not need to be the sole cause. This also means the **negligence does not need to be “sufficient” to cause the injury**, *i.e.*, enough, on its own, to make the injury happen: “As long as a defendant is part of the cause of an injury, the defendant is liable, even though its act alone was not enough to create the injury.” The other causes can be other negligent acts, or non-negligent acts or pre-existing conditions that contribute to the harm.
- Paras 31-33, on intervening causes, are a good summary of the law.

***Snell***:

- This can be viewed as companion to the later decision of ***Fontaine***. In the two cases, the Supreme Court has declared that the onus of proof never shifts. **There is never a presumption of negligence, or a presumption of causation, which the defendant must rebut to avoid being liable.** The plaintiff always has the onus to prove each element of negligence (here, causation; in ***Fontaine***, negligence).
- The subtle point about “**tactical burden**” at p 330 is important to grasp. The onus does not shift to the defendant, but of course a defendant will want to present as much evidence as it can to oppose the plaintiff’s submissions on each element of negligence. 

***Clements***:

- The text gives a good summary of the decision and the legal principles it defined relating to the **material contribution** to risk test.  But it omits the Supreme Court’s complete summary of Canadian and U.K. precedents, including ***Fairchild***. These summaries are models of how to briefly note the facts that are relevant to the issue being analyzed. 

***Cook***:

- This is an excellent example of **when “but for” proof is impossible**. The 2007 Supreme Court decision in ***Resurfice*** has reclassified the case as one of “material contribution to risk.” ***Clements*** seems to endorse this reinterpretation. So if a ***Cook***-like scenario arose today, it would likely be decided using the ***Clements*** test, not a reverse onus.

**Comment on Authority of Appeal Courts to Overturn**

The authority to overturn a causation finding is primarily a factual question, though there is an aspect of legal principle in it. That “legal” aspect is the application of the **appropriate test for causation (usually “but for”)**. The sub-question under this test is whether in a given case there is any evidence that could possibly constitute evidence of “but for” causation. This is what courts call a question of “mixed fact and law.” Unlike “purely” factual questions, **appeal courts can overturn trial court decisions on questions of mixed fact and law**. 

If there is no evidence that can possibly satisfy the “but for” causation test, the trial judge has to conclude that causation can’t be proved. **In jury trials, the trial judge would tell the jury that there is no evidence, and the action would be dismissed.** If a trial judge fails to do this, the appeal court can disagree and overturn the decision. 

## Discussion: Module 4 - Topic 4

!!! note

    For discussion, read the explanation of ***thin skull vs. crumbling skull*** in ***Athey*** at paras 34-36:

    - Can you see the difference, contrast and point out what you think are subtle and/or clear differences?
    - Discuss the elements and development of the “material contribution to risk” test.
    - You may want to note its evolution from Cook to Clements.

    You may also want to comment on the purpose of the test, i.e. general principle of fairness, its suggested rare usage, and the fact that the Supreme Court of Canada has never in fact applied the test to determine liability.

!!! info "*Athey*"

    **(5) The Thin Skull and “Crumbling Skull” Doctrines**

    34 The respondents argued that the plaintiff was predisposed to disc herniation and that this is therefore a case where the "crumbling skull" rule applies.  The “crumbling skull” doctrine is an awkward label for a fairly simple idea.  It is named after the well-known **“thin skull” rule, which makes the tortfeasor liable for the plaintiff's injuries even if the injuries are unexpectedly severe owing to a pre-existing condition.** The tortfeasor must take his or her victim as the tortfeasor finds the victim, and is therefore liable even though the plaintiff’s losses are more dramatic than they would be for the average person.

    35 The so-called “**crumbling skull**” rule simply recognizes that the pre-existing condition was inherent in the plaintiff’s “original position”. The defendant need not put the plaintiff in a position better than his or her original position.  **The defendant is liable for the injuries caused, even if they are extreme, but need not compensate the plaintiff for any debilitating effects of the pre-existing condition which the plaintiff would have experienced anyway.**  The defendant is liable for the additional damage but not the pre-existing damage:  ***Cooper-Stephenson***, *supra*, at pp. 779-780 and John Munkman, *Damages for Personal Injuries and Death* (9th ed. 1993), at pp. 39-40.   Likewise, if there is a measurable risk that the pre-existing condition would have detrimentally affected the plaintiff in the future, regardless of the defendant’s negligence, then this can be taken into account in reducing the overall award:  ***Graham v. Rourke***,  *supra*; ***Malec v. J. C. Hutton Proprietary Ltd.***, *supra*; ***Cooper-Stephenson***, *supra*, at pp. 851-852.  This is consistent with the general rule that the plaintiff must be returned to the position he would have been in, with all of its attendant risks and shortcomings, and not a better position.

    36 The “crumbling skull” argument is the respondents’ strongest submission, but in my view it does not succeed on the facts as found by the trial judge.  There was no finding of any measurable risk that the disc herniation would have occurred without the accident, and there was therefore no basis to reduce the award to take into account any such risk.


## Module 4 Summary

As you have seen the **burden is on the plaintiff** to prove their case, specifically that their loss was caused by the defendant(s) negligence. 

We have focused on the facts making or debunking the connection between a negligent and any loss suffered by the plaintiff. The central point justifying any finding of guilt and potential remedy is proving this **connection**. 


## Textbook Summary, pp 54-68

**C. CAUSATION**

The plaintiff must prove that the defendant’s negligence caused his loss. This is known as **cause-in-fact**. 

It should not be confused with the control device **remoteness of damage**, sometimes known as **proximate cause**, which may excuse a defendant from liability for loss caused to the plaintiff on the ground of fairness. 

**(1) Cause-in-Fact** 

The conventional test to determine **cause-in-fact** is the **but for test**. One must ask the question “would the plaintiff’s damage have occurred but for the defendant’s negligence?” 

If the answer is “no,” the defendant’s negligence is a cause-in-fact of the damage. If the answer is “yes,” indicating that the damage would have occurred whether or not the defendant was negligent, his negligence is not a cause-in-fact. 

The **burden of proof** in respect of **cause-in-fact** is on the plaintiff. The trier of fact is assisted by the evidence of the circumstances of the accident, but ultimately, the determination of cause-in-fact depends upon a generous application of **common sense, experience, and intuition**. 

It is not necessary to prove that the defendant’s negligence was the **sole** cause or the **predominant** cause of the plaintiff’s damage. So long as the defendant’s act is a cause of the plaintiff’s damage, the defendant is fully liable for that damage. 

In the latter part of the twentieth century, there was a good deal of debate about cause-in-fact and the sufficiency of the **but for test** to handle sophisticated medical malpractice cases; ... it was appropriate to ease the conventional burden of proof on the plaintiff by applying an **augmented risk theory**. 

An augmented risk rule would require a plaintiff to prove that the defendant was negligent and that the harm suffered by the plaintiff was within the scope of the risk created by the defendant’s negligence. This would be sufficient to establish a *prima facie* case of cause-in-fact and liability would be imposed unless the defendant was able to prove on the balance of probabilities that his conduct was not a cause-in-fact of the plaintiff’s loss. 

In ***Snell***, the Court reasserted the conventional **but for test** and the traditional burden of proof. The Court emphasized that causation rules must not be applied in a **strict or rigid manner**. It called for a flexible, pragmatic, and common-sense approach. It also noted that, where facts lie particularly within the knowledge of the defendant, little affirmative evidence of cause-in-fact is required of the plaintiff and, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, it is fair to make an **inference** of cause-in-fact. It is not appropriate, however, to **reverse the burden of proof**. The ultimate burden remains on the plaintiff. The Court also addressed the issue of expert evidence in medical malpractice cases. It is not necessary to secure a firm expert opinion in favour of the plaintiff’s assertion of cause. Medical experts tend to speak in terms of scientific certainty rather than the lower standard of the balance of probabilities favoured by tort law. 

***Snell*** provided some needed stability to the law by establishing the primacy of the but for test and providing guidance as to how it should be applied. This **stability** was, however, **shaken** by later decisions of the Supreme Court in ***Athey*** and ***Walker Estate***. 

In those cases the Court formulated an alternative test to the but for test: the **material contribution test**. It applied where the **but for test** was **unworkable** and the contribution of the defendant’s negligence to the harm was material, as contrasted to *de minimis* (trivial). 

In 2007, a full bench of the Supreme Court sought to clarify the nature and applicability of the material contribution test in ***Resurfice***. The Court confirmed that the “**basic**” and “**primary**” test of causation is the **but for test**. The **material contribution test** was applicable only in exceptional circumstances where two preconditions are met. 

- First, it must be impossible, because of factors beyond the plaintiff’s control (such as the limits of scientific knowledge) for the plaintiff to prove that the defendant’s negligence caused the plaintiff’s loss on the but for test. 
- Second, the harm suffered by the plaintiff must be of a kind that was within the scope of the risk generated by the defendant’s negligent conduct. 

The Supreme Court sought to put an end to this confusion in its decision in ***Clements***. The Court took the opportunity to recognize and define with greater precision a **material contribution** to the risk test. It is applicable only in very **rare** circumstances. Two conditions must be met. 

- First, the plaintiff must establish that his harm would not have occurred but for the negligence of **two or more** tortfeasors, each of whom is in fact possibly responsible for the loss, thereby creating a risk of the harm. 
- Second, the plaintiff through no fault of his own is **unable to prove** that either one or the other is the but for cause of the harm because each can point to the other as the possible cause, thereby creating the impossibility of proving causation on the balance of probabilities against either one. 

The ***Clements* doctrine** is, therefore, of no assistance to plaintiffs in single tortfeasor cases or in medical malpractice cases such as Snell or toxic tort cases such as ***McGhee*** where there are negligent acts combined with either innocent acts or extraneous innocent factors that may have caused the loss. In those cases, the **but for test** must be satisfied.

**(2) Alternative Liability** 

In ***Cook***, the Supreme Court adopted the American principle of **alternative liability**. It applies where it is clear that only one of a small number of negligent persons caused the plaintiff’s loss, but the plaintiff is unable to establish which person it was. If all the negligent persons are joined as defendants, the burden of proof of causation is reversed and each defendant is held jointly and severally liable (each defendant is fully liable for the plaintiff’s losses) unless he can establish on the balance of probabilities that he did not cause the loss to the plaintiff. 

This notion of alternative liability adopted in ***Cook*** would, however, appear to be overtaken by and subsumed within the **material contribution** to the risk principle in ***Clements***. The facts of Cook would appear to fall comfortably within its scope.

**(3) Joint Tortfeasors (Concerted Action)** 

In some circumstances, a number of people may be responsible for the single tortious act of one of them. In those circumstances, proof of a single tort suffices to establish liability against them all. These defendants are known as **joint tortfeasors** and they are **jointly and severally liable** for the plaintiff’s loss. 

There are **four categories** of joint tortfeasors. 

- First, one who **instigates or encourages** another to commit a tort and the person who commits it are joint tortfeasors. 
- Second, **an employer and an employee** are joint tortfeasors in respect of a tort committed by the employee within the scope of his employment. 
- Third, **a principal and agent** are joint tortfeasors in respect of torts committed by the agent within the actual or apparent authority of the agent. 
- Fourth, there is a residual fact-specific category covering other instances of **concerted action** by two or more involving the commission of a tortious act. The basis of joint responsibility in this residual category is **guilt by participation, not guilt by association**. The hunters in ***Cook***, for example, were not joint tortfeasors. It was a case of **independent and parallel tortious conduct**.

**(4) Market Share Liability** 

American law developed the theory of market share liability to address the special challenges presented by DES litigation. The plaintiffs could not rely on **alternative liability** because that principle is normally restricted to **a small number of defendants** all of whom can be brought before the court. The defendant companies were not joint tortfeasors because they were not involved in concerted action and there was no joint venture to market DES. 

A solution was found in **market share liability**. A defendant who had a 30 percent share of the national market is liable for 30 percent of the plaintiff’s damages. There is **no joint and several liability** of all defendants for all of the plaintiff’s loss. 

The idea of a collective liability of this nature has **not been addressed** by Canadian courts as yet. Consequently, market share liability has neither been accepted nor rejected.


**(5) Loss of a Chance** 

The law relating to claims for the loss of a chance of avoiding damage is not in a satisfactory state. Many American states have adopted this view, arguing that the loss of an opportunity for an improved outcome is something of real value... Nonetheless, neither the Supreme Court nor other Commonwealth jurisdictions have followed the American lead.

**(6) Multiple Tortfeasors Causing Indivisible Damage**

The four categories of **joint tortfeasors** were described earlier. Defendants who commit a series of discrete, independent torts, each of which is a cause-in-fact of the plaintiff’s damage, are **several concurrent tortfeasors**. This distinction is still one of some importance. 

For example, to secure the liability of joint tortfeasors, it is necessary to prove only a single tortious act by one of the joint tortfeasors. 

On the other hand, liability must be established individually against each of several concurrent tortfeasors. 

The importance of the distinction, however, has been minimized by legislative reform that now controls the responsibility of multiple tortfeasors. Nevertheless, the general approach to multiple tortfeasors is not significantly different from that of the *Manitoba Tortfeasors and Contributory Negligence Act*. 

Under that Act, all tortfeasors may be sued by the plaintiff in the same action ... The liability of multiple tortfeasors (**both joint tortfeasors and several concurrent tortfeasors**) is **joint and several**, which means that all of the defendant tortfeasors are liable for the full amount of the damages awarded and each defendant is individually responsible for that amount. The plaintiff may, therefore, **opt to fully execute her judgment against any one of the defendants**. 

Full satisfaction (payment) by one defendant of a settlement or judgment discharges the liability of all other defendants to the plaintiff. **Double recovery is not permitted**. 

The possible unfairness of a plaintiff executing a judgment fully against only one of several defendants has been mitigated by the **rules of contribution** among defendants. Courts are now directed to apportion the responsibility for the plaintiff’s loss among the defendants in accordance with **the degree to which each is at fault**. 

Consequently, when two defendants are held equally responsible for the plaintiff’s loss and the plaintiff chooses to execute the judgment against the first defendant, the first defendant may in turn seek contribution from the second defendant for half of the award of damages. 








