---
layout: post
title: L503 Module 7
date: 2026-03-01
draft: false
categories:
  - Law
tags:
  - LAW_V 503E E_99C 2025W2 Tort Law - Tort Law
  - Module 
---

# Intentional Torts

## Overview

This Module begins with a brief history of the trespass torts, which are now grouped under the heading “intentional torts.” This history is designed to assist with some of the basic terminology in this area. It leads to the next part, which is an overview of basic elements of intentional torts. We will take note of the **onus of proof, which favours the plaintiff**, compared to negligence claims.

The next parts of the Module set out the rules for the “**trespass to the person**” torts of **assault** and **battery**, including a consideration of **sexual wrongdoing**. We will do a brief overview of **damages** for some intentional torts. We’ll then move on to the tort of false imprisonment and then to two categories of “trespass” actions: **to land** and **to chattels**. That latter topic has also expanded since the olden days of writs. Trespass to chattels now includes two related but distinct tort claims: **conversion**, and **detinue**. Together, those three are known as “interference with chattels.” We’ll finish the Module with a survey of torts related to intentional interference to economic interests and then cover the **defences** available to intentional torts.

!!! note "Required Readings"

    - Philip H Osborne, *The Law of Torts*, 6th ed. (Toronto: Irwin Law, 2020), pp 265-332; 334-356
    - ***Warman v. Grosvenor***, [2008 CanLII 57728 (ON SC)](https://canlii.ca/t/21gdw){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Bettel et al. v. Yim***, [1978 CanLII 1580 (ON SC)](https://canlii.ca/t/g16gv){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Jones v. Tsige***, [2012 ONCA 32 (CanLII)](https://canlii.ca/t/fpnld){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Penfold’s Wines Pty. Ltd. v Elliott (1946)***, 74 C.L.R. 204 (H.C.A) **[Note 228]**
    - ***Derry v Peek (1889)***, 14 App. Cas. 337 (H.L.) **[Note 240]**
    - ***Non-Marine Underwriters, Lloyd's of London v. Scalera***, [2000 SCC 24](https://canlii.ca/t/526l){:target=" \_blank"}

## Topic 1: Historical Context

A writ, of course, originated from common law as a court order requiring an action be taken or providing legal authorization for an action. The writs are relevant, but for the most part you don’t need to worry about them; you can just learn the elements of each of the torts we consider in the remainder of the course. A refresher on writs does, however, help students to understand how the remaining torts in the course fit together, how they are distinct from negligence torts we considered in the earlier Modules of this course, and why some of them have unusual rules.

At common law, a plaintiff who had suffered personal injury or property damage could only bring a lawsuit **if their actions fell within certain categories of writs**. 

The first kind of writs were for “directly caused” injuries, and were known as “**trespass writs**”. Claims under these writs could not be for injuries that were the indirect consequence of an action. 

When more and more claims for indirectly caused harm began reaching the courts, the law established writs for indirectly caused injuries, the “**case writs**.” 

At the same time, the law became more concerned with fault, and less with “directness,” so the trespass writs began to incorporate “**intent**” requirements, just as case writs began to require **carelessness**. 

**Trespass Writ**

In the **trespass writs**, the focus was on the defendant’s direct and forceful interference, whether **to the person** (trespass to the person, trespass *vi et armis*, “by force of arms”), **to land** (trespass to land, a.k.a. trespass *quare clausum fregit*) or **to chattels**, a.k.a. goods (trespass *de bonis asportatis*). These torts are commonly called “intentional torts,” but that is not completely accurate, at least when talking about the original versions of the claims. These writs also formed the basis of English criminal laws.

Under these writs, it was the defendant’s direct conduct that was important: a direct, immediate link between the defendant’s act and some form of interference with the plaintiff. The plaintiff only needed to prove this directness. There was no need to prove that the defendant intended the interference with the plaintiff, or that the defendant’s conduct was wrongful in any other way. Nor did the plaintiff need to prove actual damage. Defining “direct” can, however, be difficult.

The policy goal behind these torts, aside from compensation, was to preserve the peace, to, among other things, take away the need for retaliation (i.e. resort to legal action and not violence). **The tort violated the plaintiff’s security and society’s tranquility**, that was the basis of the claim, **not actual physical damage**, though if there was damage, the courts compensated for it.

Today, these categories of writs **no longer exist** in our tort law. **The trespass writs have emerged into our modern day “==intentional torts==,**” a term that includes the three types of trespass claims above, as well as newer claims for intentional interference such as **infliction** of nervous shock and **invasion** of privacy. However, the old rules for trespass writs linger. Many “intentional torts” still require that the plaintiff prove directness and little else: e.g., assault, battery, false imprisonment, interference with chattels, trespass to land. Some intentional torts include both direct and indirect interferences, e.g., intentional infliction of nervous shock, detinue, and conversion.

**Case Writ**

By contrast, the **case writs** required proof of actual loss and involved damage caused indirectly by the defendant’s wrongful conduct. **From the writ on the case grew modern ==negligence law==**, which as you’ll recall is the largest area of tort law, but also **defamation**, **nuisance**, and other **strict liability torts** which we will cover in upcoming Modules.


This potted history of the words “trespass,” “direct,” and “intentional” may feel abstract to you. Don’t worry about making perfect sense of it now. We have looked at it only to lay some groundwork for the readings of the next several weeks. 

## Topic 2: Intentional Torts - Meaning of Intention

At common law, the defendant’s direct conduct was key. Some examples of direct and not direct conduct are:

- Hitting with a club – yes, **direct**: the club is an extension of one’s arm
- Throwing stone – yes, **direct**: no need for constant contact between defendant’s body and the object that strikes the plaintiff
- Placing overdoes of pepper in soup – **not direct**: requires the plaintiff to bring soup to mouth (this example just steps over the direct/indirect line)
- Donating HIV-infected blood – **not direct**: hospital that transfuses blood into plaintiff breaks chain (this is further into indirect territory)

Once the plaintiff has shown that the defendant’s actions were direct, then the **onus shifts to the defendant** to disprove that the defendant acted **intentionally** or **negligently** (i.e., must prove both a lack of intention and a lack of negligence). So you see how that old concept of “directness” is still important in the law.

**Intentional Conduct**

The text begins its discussion of intent at **p 265** with a discussion of **actual intent**, and continues with an explanation of **constructive/imputed intent** and **transferred intent**. 

To understand these concepts of “**intent**” in the context of these torts, you need to realize, first, that intent is not defined so narrowly as to necessarily mean that the defendant intended the very specific outcome in that case: it can be “**imputed**,” and can be “**transferred**.” 

**Intent Defined - Imputed & Transferred Intent**

The text covers intent’s meaning at pp 267-268. 

**To satisfy the “intent” requirement, the defendant must do something on purpose, knowing with substantial certainty what the consequence of the act would be, or desiring that consequence.** It does not matter that the defendant had no intent to injure **the** plaintiff. It is the defendant’s intent to do an act knowing what will result that is important. **This distinction is vital.**

Intent can also be imputed or transferred. 

!!! example ""

    **Imputed intent** (also known as **constructive intent**) is where intent is attributed to the defendant even if the defendant did not intend to cause the damage. Why? Because he knew (or **should have known**) with substantial certainty that the damage would result.

!!! example ""

    **Transferred intent** means that the defendant intended one set of consequences and a different one resulted. The courts will take the intent that the defendant had, and transfer it to the second situation. There are two different ways in which this applies:
    
    Defendant intends to commit tort to one person, but ends up committing tort to another person (different object). By “object” I mean recipient or target: i.e., a different person or thing at the other end of the defendant’s action. The object need not be a **person**: it can be a person’s **property**. The text (at p 267) uses a classic simple example: A intends to hit B, but ends up hitting C instead. You could call this “same tort, different victim.” This principle may apply to a variant called “same victim, different tort.” Defendant intends to commit a certain type of tort, but another type of tort results (different tort). For example, A intends to hit B (battery, but ends up hitting B’s car, trespass to chattel).

**Volition and Intent**

You’ll recall that **volition** is generally an “essential” element for legal liability (see p 43, note 43). The text referenced a case (***Stokes v Carlson*** 240 S.W.2d 132 (Mo. 1951)). The defendant was able to **negate intent** by proving that the act was **involuntary**, or that the defendant lacked capacity at the time of the act. **Voluntariness is required for intent to exist** and the defendant’s act must’ve been consciously directed. However, the onus is on the defendant to prove the absence of voluntariness.

Note that courts sometimes use the terms “voluntary” and “intentional” as synonyms. That is not strictly accurate. **If the act is not voluntary, there is no intentional conduct**, therefore no intentional tort. By contrast, **there can be voluntary conduct which is unintentional**, e.g., due to a lack of capacity as with a child, or someone mentally ill. 

A sleepwalker who trespasses is not liable, nor is someone whose body movements from an **epileptic seizure** cause injury to someone else. In short, it bears repeating that if the defendant’s mind has not directed the movements, the movements are involuntary and there is no tort.

**Note on Children**

Canadian law generally hold that persons who do not have the capacity to understand the consequences of their actions have not acted voluntarily or formed the requisite intent to commit the tort. This usually applies to cases involving **children** of “tender years,” and to the **mentally ill** (as discussed in negligence under mental disability, pp 43-45). 

But there is **no automatic immunity from liability**: it depends on the facts.

Note that where a child does commit a tort in British Columbia, section 3 of the *Parental Liability Act*, SBC 2001, c 45 makes the parents of a child liable for the child’s actions where the child intentionally takes, damages or destroy property of another. Under s 6, the parents’ liability is limited to \$10,000, and s 9 gives the parents the potential defence that they reasonably supervised the child and made reasonable efforts to prevent or discourage the child from the type of activity that was committed.

!!! danger "Module 7 - Topic 2 - Practice Question"

    1. Three types of intent we covered are actual intent and (select two other types of intent)
        - [x] transferred intent
        - [x] imputed intent
        - [ ] retained intent
        - [ ] No answer text provided.

## Topic 3: Intentional Interference with the Person

This is a large topic encompassing many subtopics and categories. We’ll begin our discussion of **intentional interference with the person** by looking at **assault** and **battery**. 

An assault is generally the **threat** of an imminent battery. Battery is the **actual harmful or offensive** bodily contact. 

As the text notes, it’s possible to have an assault but no battery (i.e. pointing a loaded gun at someone, threaten to shoot, but not shooting). Less common it’s possible to have a battery but no assault (i.e. hitting someone from behind by surprise can be a battery without an assault). **Assault and battery are thus tied together but are independent causes of action**. 

Since an assault in tort law technically precedes a battery we’ll look at assault first (pp 272-75). We’ll then look at other intentional torts that fall under intentional interference with the person.

**Assault**

Assault as a tort is derived from the writ of trespass *vi et armis*, which deals with directly-caused injury to the person, and directly-caused injury is all the plaintiff needs to prove. Civil actions in assault alone are rare. The damages are usually nominal for assault alone (see p 274, note 23). However there are exceptions that deal with repeated and persistent assaults targeting an individual (*ibid*, note 24). **Most assault lawsuits go hand in hand with actions in battery.**

The first thing to remember about assault is that there is **no physical contact** by the defendant to the plaintiff. There is no touching, and no harm need be sustained, this tort is “actionable *per se*.” The elements of assault are twofold:

- **Direct, intentional threat by defendant:** the defendant intentionally and voluntarily makes a threat of immediate harmful or offensive contact
- **Apprehension by plaintiff:** the defendant’s threat created in plaintiff’s mind a subjective but reasonable apprehension of immediate harmful or offensive contact

<u>Subjective but reasonable apprehension vs. actual violence or intent to do violence</u>

The plaintiff must prove that the defendant’s conduct created in the plaintiff’s mind the apprehension of immediate harmful or offensive contact. **It is irrelevant whether the defendant was actually going to carry out the threat. It is whether the plaintiff believed**, with reason, that the threat was going to be carried out and the defendant had the apparent means to carry it out immediately. So in ***Stephens v Myers*** (1830), 4 C. & P. 349, 172 E.R. 735 (N.P.). (p 273, note 19) assault was found, since the plaintiffs perceived the threat of imminent harm by the defendants.

<u>Onus</u>

Once the plaintiff has proven that such apprehension was created, then the **defendant has the burden** of showing that the threat was **not made intentionally or voluntarily**.


**Forms of Assault**

An assault most often involves words accompanied by actions. However, it can be by actions alone (e.g., shaking a fist and running towards someone). Some useful **definitions** of what constitute assault are set out in ***Mainland Sawmills Ltd. v. USW Union Local - 1-3567***, [2007 BCSC 1433 (CanLII)](https://canlii.ca/t/1t1fc){:target=" \_blank"} (see p 274, note 23). The decision is not required reading but may be useful as a reference.

<u>Immediacy and the Effect of Conditions</u>

As noted above in both parts of the definition of assault, **immediacy** is an important **element of proving assault**. If the threat is not of immediate harm, there is no assault. But what if the threat can be carried out immediately, but a condition is attached? The answer is: it depends on the circumstances, but **if there is a condition that takes away a reasonable apprehension of immediate harm, there is no assault**.

One of our case readings, ***Warman v Grosvenor***, [2008 CanLII 57728 (ON SC)](https://canlii.ca/t/21gdw){:target=" \_blank"}, stretches the notion of immediate harm (see p 274, note 24). The Ontario court found that it (anonymous blogs and social-media posts that target a specific person) was an assault, indeed as the text describes a “sustained campaign of terror.” But the decision is fascinating as it notes **specific posted words online that suggest potential harm**. 

**Battery**

Battery is also derived from the trespass writ, involving directly caused injury to the person. A battery is established when there is **direct intentional contact by one to another that is harmful or offensive**. Some points to remember:

- The contact must be **unlawful** in that it was **not consented to** by the plaintiff, however contact that is part of everyday life or accepted social practices (e.g., mere jostling on the bus, or on a narrow bridge) is not battery.
- The contact **does not have to be actual touching** by the defendant to the plaintiff. It can be made **through an object** (e.g., throwing something at another which strikes that person), or **through a substance** (e.g., spitting on someone), nor does the person have to be **aware** of the touching (e.g., they are asleep at the time). It can be contact with objects on the person (e.g., a bag or clothing), or objects associated with the person (e.g., contact with a car that the person is in). This may sound indirect to you, but the law treats it as direct.

As with assault, **no actual damage or injury need be sustained**, as battery is actionable *per se*. **If there is intentional contact that is merely offensive but not harmful, the tort can still be established.** An example of this might be where someone spits at another. No actual physical injury is sustained, but the person’s dignity may be wounded. That person could theoretically sue in battery (although practically speaking it would be unlikely to bring such action). Note that what is “**offensive**” is based on **what a reasonable person would consider offensive**.

The leading case on the tort of battery is ***Bettel et al. v. Yim***, [1978 CanLII 1580 (ON SC)](https://canlii.ca/t/g16gv){:target=" \_blank"} where it was held that **a defendant is liable for all consequences** of a battery, not just those that were foreseeable (see p 270, note 13). 

In ***Bettel***, the court ruled that **foreseeability** of damage (remoteness of damage) component of negligence actions **does not apply to intentional torts**. The defendant intended to shake the boy; therefore intent was seen to encompass all injuries sustained by the plaintiff including the nose injury. You may have the opinion that nose damage is a foreseeable outcome of such an action anyway, but the point is that if you commit a battery you are responsible for all bodily harm that results.

An area of public contention is **disciplining children**, which the text covers under defences (p 308). Are parents or teachers allowed to spank children to discipline them, or would this be considered battery? 

Section 43 of the *Criminal Code*, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 permits such persons in authority to spank children to discipline them if they use a reasonable amount of force. This section has been challenged as being unconstitutional as affecting the child’s right to security of the person. A 5-member majority of the Supreme Court of Canada ruled in ***Canadian Foundation for Children, Youth and the Law v. Canada (Attorney General)***, [2004 SCC 4 (CanLII)](https://canlii.ca/t/1g990){:target=" \_blank"} that the section was constitutional, as long as it was given a narrower interpretation than some courts had applied in the past. The Court therefore directed that the degree of force applied had to be **minimal**, **causing no lasting injuries** (“minor corrective force of a transitory and trifling nature”), and **applied only to children aged 3 to 12**. 

**Sexual Wrongdoing**

**Sexual wrongdoing is not a separate tort.** For a sexual wrongdoing to be tortious, **it must fit into the definitions of assault or battery** (or others, e.g., invasion of privacy). Victims of sexual wrongdoing, however, are often a special category of claim. Victims bring claims not only to get compensation, but also for **other purpose**: justice, deterrence, punishment, appeasement, empowerment. This affects how law treats such victims and influence some of the exceptions noted below.

<u>A note on sexual wrongdoing</u>

The text refers to “sexual battery” at several points (see p 271, note 14 and p 304, note 145) in terms of making the tort of battery fit more into the nature of sexual wrongdoing. There is also increasing use of the tort of “intentional infliction of nervous shock” to cover sexual harassment cases (see p 283, note 49). 

For our purposes now however it is useful to note the following **two points** relating to assault and battery and sexual wrongdoing:

- In British Columbia, actions involving sexual wrongdoing are **not subject to a limitation period**, whereas those involving assault and battery of a non-sexual nature fall under the **2-year limitation period**. These rules have been in place for a while. In the new BC *Limitation Act*, RSBC 2012, c 12, they are in s 3(1)(i)-(k).
- Conduct that gives rise to civil actions in assault, battery and sexual wrongdoing can also lead to **criminal prosecutions** for assault. Sections 264.1 and 265 of the *Criminal Code* deal with assault, which includes uttering threats, and applying direct or indirect force on another, whether with a weapon or not.

**False imprisonment**

Like the intentional torts of assault and battery, false imprisonment is an interference with the person that is derived from the trespass writ *vi et armis*. It involves **restraining a person against that person’s will**, e.g., by **kidnapping**, **locking in a room**, or even **intimidating**. The plaintiff must prove that the defendant completely restrained the plaintiff, whether physically or psychologically (i.e., the defendant knew or ought to have known with substantial certainty that restraint would result in an attempt to leave).

The restraint may be of short duration, and it is not necessary that the plaintiff be aware of the restraint (e.g., if the plaintiff is drugged or asleep). Many of these cases involve allegations against **police authorities**, **store owners**, or **security guards** who detain people for investigation or questioning.

***Bird v Jones (1845)***, 7 Q.B.R. 742, 115 E.R. 668 (Q.B.) confirms that “**total restraint**” is required to establish the tort (p 275, note 27). The plaintiff's action for false imprisonment failed, since he was not restricted from moving in other directions, or even across the bridge. 

False imprisonment is sometimes accompanied by the use of **physical force**, however it **need not be**. Restraint can also be by **physical barriers** (e.g., a locked door), or through **psychological means such as threats or duress** (e.g. person does not leave, due to a fear of being arrested).

**Malicious prosecution**

The tort of malicious prosecution involves indirectly caused interference. These actions stem from the wrongful criminal prosecutions of an accused. In ***Nelles v. Ontario***, [1989 CanLII 77 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1ft2z){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court did describe the four elements required for the tort of malicious prosecution:

- **Criminal proceedings** must be initiated by the defendant
- Proceedings must terminate **in plaintiff’s favour**
- Proceedings must have been instituted **without reasonable cause**
- Defendant must have been **malicious** 
 
You can probably see that the last **two elements are difficult to prove**. In practice, they bar many of these claims.

Malicious prosecution was revisited by the Supreme Court of Canada recently in another awful case, ***Miazga v. Kvello Estate***, [2009 SCC 51](https://canlii.ca/t/26g27){:target=" \_blank"}. The basis of the Supreme Court’s decision was twofold: 

- (a) **absence of malice** on the part of the prosecutor; and 
- (b) there was **reasonable cause** to commence the proceeding.

**Abuse of process**

Related to, but different from, malicious prosecution is the tort of abuse of process (p 281). In abuse of process claims, the plaintiff must prove the following **four conditions**:

- The defendant initiated **a civil action** (i.e. court process )
- The civil action is against the plaintiff for some **improper or ulterior purpose** unrelated to the subject matter of the claim itself.
- There must also be evidence of some definite act or threat, **extraneous** to the court action itself, that nevertheless **furthers its purpose**.
- Finally, the plaintiff has to prove that he **suffered damages**.

A few key points here. The initiation of litigation itself cannot in itself be an abuse of process. There has to be some “overt act” independent of the litigation that is meant to advance a defendant’s “wrongful purpose” (p 281). Also, Osborne mentions the policy and legal debate over retaining the requirement of an overt act to prove abuse of process. In general, it does seem preferable to retaining that requirement to avoid a “**chilling effect**” (as he describes it) on plaintiffs.

**Intentional infliction of nervous shock**

The common law **barred recovery for intentional acts** of a defendant that merely resulted in **mental suffering without physical harm**. For example, where a defendant makes a threat of some harm in the future to the plaintiff, and the plaintiff suffers emotional distress, the plaintiff is generally unable to sue in trespass for directly caused injury. An action in assault would fail (for **lack of immediacy**), and the plaintiff would have no recourse. To address this problem, courts created the tort of **intentional infliction of nervous shock**.

Recall that a duty of care in negligence may arise to persons who suffer from nervous shock if there is sufficient proximity (relational, locational, temporal). In contrast, in intentional infliction of nervous shock cases, the **elements** that need to be proven are outlined in the following case.

***Wilkinson v Downton*** [1897] 2 Q.B. 57 was the first case to recognize the tort of **intentional infliction of nervous shock** (at p 282, note 47). The court found that to establish the tort, the plaintiff needed to **prove three elements**: 

1. Extreme, flagrant or outrageous **conduct** 
2. **Intent** to cause the plaintiff harm. The defendant does not need to intend the actual harm suffered, but must intend to cause some harm (the intent will be imputed to the actual loss sustained) 
3. Plaintiff suffers **actual psychological harm**. This must be a physical manifestation of illness or psychiatric disorder.

## Discussion: Module 7 - Topic 3

Please consider the following questions. 

> As we reviewed earlier, ***Warman v Grosvenor*** stretches the notion of immediate harm. One of the keys to the decision was that the **specific wording** used online suggested, in the court’s view, **potential harm** rather than mere rants or insults.

- Read more closely the courts’ analysis at **paras 58-63**, especially the second last para of the excerpt (para 62). What do you think?
- It is also interesting to consider whether the plaintiff in ***Warman*** might have been successful in a claim for **intentional infliction of nervous shock** and whether that tort is the more appropriate one, compared to assault.

Of course, assault is easier for a plaintiff to prove, though the decision does seem to stretch the precedents when it comes to the threat of immediate harm. Mr Warman’s suffering due to the continuous barrage of online invective was real and understandable, as the judge in that case pointed out; but might it not have more in common with the kinds of harms that **intentional infliction of nervous shock** addresses, and redresses?

??? warning "*Warman v. Grosvenor*, [2008 CanLII 57728 (ON SC)](https://canlii.ca/t/21gdw){:target=" \_blank"}"

    ***Assault***

    [58] Assault is the intentional creation of the apprehension of imminent harmful or offensive contact. The tort of assault furnishes protection for the interest in freedom from fear of being physically interfered with. Damages are recoverable by someone who is made **apprehensive of immediate physical contact, even though that conduct never actually occurs**: Allen M. Linden and Bruce Feldthusen, *Canadian Tort Law*, 8th ed. (Markham, Ont.: LexisNexis, 2006), at p. 46.

    [59] Conduct that intentionally arouses apprehension of an imminent battery (physical contact) constitutes an assault. Frightening or threatening someone, however, does not constitute an assault **unless the event feared is imminent**: *Canadian Tort Law*, *supra*, at p. 47.

    [60] I am satisfied that the plaintiff is reasonably apprehensive of imminent physical contact **as a result of the postings and the e-mails**.

    [61] By way of example, in the first posting, the defendant invited readers to let the plaintiff "meet his just fate - execution at the hands of a people's government". In the second posting through to the fourteenth posting and continuing to the present time, the defendant urged readers to "pay him a visit" and included the plaintiff's residence address and phone numbers. The sixth posting encouraged the readers "to email the co-op and complain about their resident (he may get kicked out if they get enough complaints)". The plaintiff testified that the management of his co-operative where he lived did receive calls. As a consequence, he moved to a different address at the end of October 2007. The seventh posting referred to the plaintiff as "a dead Jew walkin'". The fourteenth posting concluded its message with, "I AM GOD AND I HAVE A RUGER P-90 AND IT'S BULLETS HAVE YOUR NAME ON THEM FAGBOY WARMAN". One of the e-mails in March 2008 said, "Your day of reckoning is coming, you little homo creep!"

    [62] The postings and the e-mails have continued **for over two years**. They have **persistently** expressed hatred and anger and have called on others to act against the plaintiff, to try to get him evicted and to make him a target of violence. They are not general threats. They are threatening and intimidating and **by virtue of** their repetitiveness, their detail regarding the plaintiff's whereabouts and their level of malevolence, they are more than mere empty threats and insults. They are **vicious** and **serious** and [page678] are to be taken seriously. **They have made the plaintiff apprehensive of imminent physical harm** and reasonably so, particularly in the context of the wide publication of the postings on the Internet and **the very real possibility** that someone will, as they have in the past by contacts with the management of the plaintiff's residence, act on the defendant's repeated invitations to others to find the plaintiff and inflict serious physical harm on him.

    [63] It is for these reasons that I find the plaintiff is entitled to recover damages for the defendant's assault against him.

!!! quote "Answer"

    Immediacy is an essential element in establishing assault. If the threat does not involve immediate harm, there is no assault. As the court held in ***Mainland Sawmills Ltd. v. USW Union Local - 1-3567***, 2007 BCSC 1433,

    > [99] ... A threat to do harm at some future time does not constitute an assault because such a threat is not as likely to spur retaliation.

    In ***Warman v. Grosvenor***, 2008 CanLII 57728 (ON SC), the court expanded the concept of immediate harm to include online postings and emails, particularly in light of the following features identified by the court:

    - **Time**: continued for over two years
    - **Frequency**: persistent expressions of hatred and anger
    - **Level**: not merely general threats; by virtue of their repetitiveness, their detail regarding the plaintiff's whereabouts, and their level of malevolence
    - **Nature**: vicious and serious
    - **Harm**: caused the plaintiff to apprehend imminent physical harm
    
    As a result, the court found that the threat was “immediate,” and assault was established against the defendant.

    I think a tort claim would be easier to establish if it were pursued through the Intentional Infliction of Nervous Shock (“IINS”) path, and damages for mental suffering would be easier to substantiate. Under IINS, according to ***Wilkinson v. Downton*** [1897] 2 Q.B. 57, a plaintiff need only prove three elements, all of which were apparent in ***Warman***’s case:

    - (1) Extreme, flagrant, or outrageous conduct
    - (2) Intent to cause the plaintiff harm
    - (3) The plaintiff suffers actual psychological harm
    
    This IINS framework removes the requirement of immediacy and incorporates mental suffering as a central element, making a case such as ***Warman*** easier to succeed.
    
## Topic 3.1: Invasion of Privacy

**Invasion of Privacy**

Invasion of privacy is an area where the courts have grappled with the creation of a new intentional tort. As the text mentions (at p 284) some provinces, including British Columbia, have **privacy acts** legislating a privacy tort. In the rest of the Canada invasion of privacy is dealt with through **common law**.

**A note on privacy in constitutional law**

The law in Canada is clear that there is a fundamental right to privacy, at least, in the sense of direct interference by the state. The right to privacy is discussed in the text under the general common law principles (p 284). It has been described by the Supreme Court of Canada in ***Hunter et al. v. Southam Inc.***, [1984 CanLII 33 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1mgc1){:target=" \_blank"} as “the right to be let alone by other people” and a “right to be secure against encroachment upon the citizens’ reasonable expectation of privacy in a free and democratic society.” (p 287 note 73). 

This right, however, is not a general right of privacy that citizens can use against all intrusions, but a principle underlying specific *Charter* rights. These include **sections 7** (right to life, liberty and security of the person) and **8** (right against unreasonable search and seizure). Some protection is also afforded to individuals under the *Criminal Code*, such as the provisions on wire-tapping, those protections are not at the level of constitutional rights, but the *Charter* can back them up.

**Privacy as a tort: common law**

The question of whether there is a common law tort for invasion of the right to privacy is **unsettled**. 

In the **United States**, there is such a tort. Privacy interests there cover such areas as (1) intrusion on a person’s seclusion (including physical harassment), (2) public disclosure of private facts, (3) negative publications, and (4) misappropriation of a person’s likeness for another’s benefit.

In **Canada**, while some lower court decisions have recognized a cause of action for invasion of privacy and allowed recovery for damages, **the creation of a new tort has not as yet been confirmed by the Supreme Court of Canada**. Rather, many courts have attempted to frame recovery for such actions **under existing common law tort categories such as ==nuisance, trespass or harassment**==.

In 1991, Ontario came close to recognizing a separate tort for invasion of privacy. In ***Roth v. Roth (Gen. Div.)***, [1991 CanLII 7220 (ON SC)](https://canlii.ca/t/g19mz){:target=" \_blank"} referenced in our text on this topic (p 287, note 66), the trial court found that the defendants’ actions in blocking the road to the plaintiff’s cottage and interfering with the plaintiffs’ use of their property constituted “a harassment of the plaintiffs in the enjoyment of their property which is of a kind that a person of normal sensitivity would regard as offensive and intolerable and is an invasion of the plaintiff’s rights of privacy.” 

The court in ***Roth*** referred to other nuisance cases which protect similar interests, but noted their limitations, since such claims are usually reserved to plaintiffs with a proprietary interest in the land on which they are being harassed, guests cannot sue. It supported the creation of a tort of **invasion of privacy**, or **of harassment**, or **both** (since in the United States the two overlap).

In the intervening years Ontario courts have begun to move more confidently towards establishing a privacy tort. This movement has culminated in ***Jones v. Tsige***, [2012 ONCA 32](https://canlii.ca/t/fpnld){:target=" \_blank"}. This decision has, in Ontario at least, firmly established a new tort of “**intrusion upon seclusion**”. There, the defendant’s unlawful access to the plaintiff’s banking and other personal information was actionable under this tort.

The full text of the ***Jones*** decision sets out an almost exhaustive review of the case law in Canada, the U.S., and the U.K. including the following **elements to establish an invasion of privacy**:

- Defendant’s conduct must be **intentional** (including **reckless disregard** to the potential invasion);
- Defendant’s conduct has **invaded** the plaintiff’s private affairs, without justification; and
- **A reasonable person would regard** the invasion as offensive enough to cause harms such as distress, humiliation, or anguish. Here, **proof of actual harm is not required**, be it financial loss or diagnosed mental or physical consequences. The invasion need only meet the criterion of a “reasonable person” regarding the act as offensive enough to suffer such harms.

The ***Jones*** decision establishes the law in Ontario, not across Canada. The **B.C. courts** have not been as liberal. For example, ***Lord and Lord v. A.G. Canada***, [2001 BCSC 212](https://canlii.ca/t/1flzg){:target=" \_blank"} **rejected** the general proposition that **a right to privacy exists in common law** (referenced in our text at p 291, note 93). Given that in BC there is a statute to protect privacy interests, this is unlikely to change.

**Privacy as a tort: Legislation**

British Columbia has joined several provinces in passing legislation to create the tort of invasion of privacy. The *Privacy Act*, [RSBC 1996, c 373](https://www.bclaws.gov.bc.ca/civix/document/id/complete/statreg/00_96373_01){:target=" \_blank"}, s 1 states:

> 1(1) It is a tort, actionable without proof of damage [i.e., per se], for a person, wilfully and without a claim of right, to violate the privacy of another.

The Act does not define what constitutes a “violation of privacy”, this depends on the circumstances of each case, including the nature of the violation and the relationship between the parties involved. 

What about **celebrities** or **public figures** that are the subject of “tell-all” books or unauthorized biographies? Does this fall under invasion of privacy? There may be potential violation of privacy (but not misappropriation of personality, since the latter is more about a proprietary interest – we’ll discuss that further below under intentional interference with economic interests). Also note that the B.C. *Privacy Act*, s 2(3)(a) states that 

> a publication of a private matter is not invasion if the matter is of public interest or is fair comment on a matter of public interest.

**Stalking**

Stalking is another type of conduct where **celebrities** or **public figures** feature prominently as victims, although **ordinary individuals** are often victims as well. Stalking in Canada is generally dealt with as a criminal matter (**criminal harassment**) through s 264(1) of the *Criminal Code* (see p 293, note 105). As the text notes **there is no independent common law tort of stalking**, although examples are given of stalking-like conduct that **amounted to an invasion of privacy** (p 294, note 106).

Provincial legislation may also circumscribe stalking. The Manitoba legislation cited in our text (p 294, note 108) creates a distinct tort of “stalking.” Unlike Manitoba, B.C. does not have that type of broad anti-stalking legislation but deals with stalking (by family members) through its family law legislation. BC Section 1(d)(iii) of the BC *Family Law Act*, [SBC 2011, c 25](https://www.bclaws.gov.bc.ca/civix/document/id/complete/statreg/11025_00){:target=" \_blank"}, defines “family violence” to include “stalking or following of the family member” while Part 9 of the Act offers several court ordered protection methods against stalking (along with other types of family violence).

**Discrimination: Human rights matter**

Another area in which courts have considered creating a new tort is **discrimination**. The leading case is ***Seneca College v. Bhadauria***, [1981 CanLII 29 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1mjln){:target=" \_blank"} which is referenced in our text (p 202, note 102). The plaintiff sued in tort for discrimination by the defendant college. On appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada the court unanimously held that such actions should and could be effectively dealt with under **provincial human rights legislation**, and not through the creation of a new tort at common law.

**Remedies**

Damage awards (or remedies) for assault, battery and sexual wrongdoing are calculated as in personal injury actions in negligence. Damages may be for pecuniary loss and non-pecuniary loss for any harm sustained. 

Damages for assault alone tend to be small. For battery, harm to a person’s dignity can often attract higher damage awards than physical injury, as a person’s dignitary interest is what the tort of battery is meant to protect. 

**Aggravated** damages and **punitive** damages may also be awarded in certain situations. Aggravated damages are meant to provide extra compensation essentially for aggravating factors that make the defendant’s harms worse (i.e. humiliation, degradation, extreme violence accompanying sexual assault). Punitive damages are meant to be strong deterrents to conduct that is viewed as especially intolerable, outrageous or extremely socially unacceptable (i.e. sexual batteries, road rage involving violence). 

The text reviews damage awards under separate remedies for trespass to person, land and chattels.

A good example of the concept of punitive damages is found in ***Whiten v. Pilot Insurance Co.***, [2002 SCC 18](https://canlii.ca/t/51vn){:target=" \_blank"}. It is referenced in our text (p 313, note 177) and is **a leading case** of the Supreme Court of Canada on the applicability of **punitive damages**.

Often, the wrongdoer in these types of actions is “judgement-proof” (i.e., poor) and cannot pay any award of damages. However, this doesn’t always leave the victim with no compensation. For torts that are also crimes, there may be compensation available under provincial legislation to financially assist victims of crime.

In British Columbia, the *Crime Victim Assistance Act*, [SBC 2001, c 38](https://www.bclaws.gov.bc.ca/civix/document/id/complete/statreg/01038_01){:target=" \_blank"} allows for benefits to be paid to victims of crime, their family members, and even those who witness crimes, for pecuniary losses (medical expenses, income loss, etc.). This does not, however, include an amount for non-pecuniary damages.

## Topic 4: Intentional Interference with Land: Trespass to Land

We generally know what trespassing is direct and unlawful intentional entry onto one’s land. 

Of particular interest is the issue of **continuing trespass**, where an object unlawfully placed on another’s land gives rise to a new causes of action every day until its removed. This is one way this tort deals with limitation periods. 

There are also situations where persons may be given permission to remain on land for a period of time and then overstay their welcome, i.e. the disorderly bar patron who refuses to leave at 2 am. 

Initially the **tort** was meant to **protect landowners** as a privileged class, and then adopted the principle of quiet enjoyment of property (the old adage “a man’s home is his castle” (p 315) is a good example of a motto inspired by law). Importantly, this tort stands as **a complement to property law** in allowing a property owner to assert certain rights against establishment of easements on property. 

However, although the party whose land has been interfered with has to be in **occupation** (**possession**) of the land at the time of the intrusion, **they need not own the land**. In fact, the cases indicate that an owner may not be entitled to a remedy in trespass if they are not in occupation at the time of the trespass. 

Trespass to land is actionable *per se*: **it does not require actual damages**. A defendant may simply have walked across the plaintiff’s yard, or the defendant may have dumped toxic chemicals onto the plaintiff’s yard. Both situations are trespass and that point is fairly clear. 

Trespass is not only committed where one physically enters upon the land of another. It can also exist where objects, projections, structures, chattels invade the land. The **failure of persons to leave** or the **failure to remove objects** when requested, also constitute trespass.

**Elements of Liability**

We’ll briefly look over the **essential elements of trespass to land**:

- There has to be an **intrusion** onto the land
- The intrusion onto the land must be **direct**

There is **no requirement of proof of damage**. The **cause of action** in trespass to land lies with **an unauthorized intrusion** onto the plaintiff’s land, no matter how minor that intrusion may be.

In ***Mann v Saulner (1959)***, 19 D.L.R. (2d) 130 (N.B.S.C.A.D.) the key point in deciding was that the fence did not make a direct intrusion and was analogous to the incursions of branches or roots of trees. However, the decision in ***Mann*** also contained an interesting comment on the applicability of the **defence of inevitable accident** to the trespass of land. 

<u>Onus of proof</u>

The burden lies with the **plaintiff** to **prove a direct interference with land**. As with trespass to the person (and like trespass to chattels, which we will discuss in a bit), once the plaintiff proves direct interference by the defendant, the onus shifts to the **defendant** to prove that the defendant’s actions were **unintentional or without negligence**. In other words, the defendant must prove that the direct interference was not intentional or negligent.

One interesting point is that the plaintiff must prove an actual **physical intrusion**. There is some murkiness in Canadian law about what constitutes a physical intrusion, although things like smoke and noise are not considered a physical intrusion. **The general remedy for these issues lies with a nuisance action**, which we’ll discuss later in the course.

<u>Remedies</u>

When there is **actual loss** damages are **not restricted to reasonably foreseeable consequences** and defendants are potential liable for much more. See ***Turner v. Thorne and Thorne***, [1959 CanLII 409 (ON SC)](https://canlii.ca/t/gwdmq){:target=" \_blank"} where the plaintiff (defendant?) was held liable for both **direct and indirect injuries** resulting from the trespass to land (at p 320, note 190).

**Injunctions** are another remedy that can be sought for trespass to land. The court may order someone to stop incidents of trespassing (prohibitory injunction) or order someone to take action to stop continuous trespass, such as objects left on land or a fence extending into someone else’s property (mandatory injunction). 

Before considering injunctive relief in any situation, including trespass, you want to consider several questions involving readiness, financial implications, nature of damages suffered by the trespass, and the nature of the status quo trespass. Although it seems obvious, in cases of trespass its especially important that **before seeking injunctive relief you have evidence that the plaintiff actually asked the defendant to stop the trespass**.

**Shopping Malls, trespass and Trespass Acts**

The Supreme Court of Canada in ***Harrison v. Carswell***, [1975 CanLII 160 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1z6gp){:target=" \_blank"} upheld the right of **a mall property owner to exclude any individual**. 

It also raises questions in common law about the ability to exclude a member of the public – for any reason – from something like a shopping mall which on the surface seems like a quasi-public gathering place. One important fact to consider (and mentioned by Osborne at p 322): ***Harrison*** was decided before the implementation of the *Charter of Rights and Freedoms* so it seems likely that the issue will be revisited at some point in the future.

In addition to the common law, in British Columbia, the *Trespass Act*, [RSBC 1996, c 462](https://www.bclaws.gov.bc.ca/civix/document/id/consol18/consol18/00_96462_01){:target=" \_blank"} may also apply to shopping malls. Section 4 that it is an offence for a person to do any of these:

- enter “enclosed land” [i.e., fenced, naturally bounded, or clearly signed]
- enter premises when the person “has had notice from an occupier” that entry is prohibited, or
- engage in activities when the person “has had notice” that they are prohibited.

**Consent is a defence**, of course, but under s 4(3) once an occupier tells a visitor to leave or to stop a particular activity, it is an offence to stay or continue the activity. Remember in particular that the *Trespass Act* only applies to lands that are physically enclosed (walls or fence as in a mall), or well-marked areas with “no trespassing” signs.

It is up to the crown, not occupiers, to prosecute under the Act. However, if the trespasser is convicted, the occupier affected by the trespass has the option to apply for compensation, under section 11 of the *Act*. But see **subsection (2)**: 

> if the occupier receives damages under the Act, then the occupier **loses the right to recover in tort**.

**Trespass to Airspace**

A person’s right to possession of his property without unlawful interference applies not only to the actual land (ground) but also **extends to the airspace above the land and subsoil beneath the land**. 

The latin maxim *cujus est solum ejus est usque ad coelom* roughly means “whoever owns the soil, it is theirs up to heaven and down to hell.” The text gives a brief overview of the concept and what you need to know about the soil/air aspect of trespass to land is contained there and in this subsection.

Regarding trespass to airspace, the courts have determined that **it is a trespass to directly and intentionally physically enter into the airspace** above the land to **a reasonable height** that is necessary for ordinary use and enjoyment. A “reasonable height” has been defined as including any height which is capable of being possessed and enjoyed. This height does not go so far as to encumber aeronautical operations, such as helicopters and airplanes, but would include the height of tall skyscrapers.

For example, in ***Atlantic Aviation v Nova Scotia Light & Power Co Ltd (1965)***, 55 D.L.R. (2d) 554 (N.S.S.C.), the court considered whether the defendant had a right to use the airspace over its lands to erect transmission towers, to the detriment of the plaintiff’s flight school operations (at p 324, note 204). The court reasoned that the defendant was entitled to erect the towers, as such was **a lawful, reasonable and necessary use of the defendant’s airspace**.

The principle of **effective possession** is probably representative of the current position on aircraft trespass. Effective possession is a fuzzy concept but in ***Didow v. Alberta Power Limited***, [1988 ABCA 257 (CanLII)](https://canlii.ca/t/2dm47){:target=" \_blank"} the court noted as a strong submission that “actionable trespass only occurs when the intrusion into air space actually interferes with a landowner’s use and enjoyment of that space” (at para 26). There doesn’t seem to be a set level or altitude in Canadian law to which an on owner can claim effective possession of airspace.

Incidentally, the same principles apply to the intrusion of an **occupier’s right to subsoil**. An occupier is entitled to use and enjoy the subsoil beneath the land, to a reasonable depth. This depth can be several hundred feet below the surface, as this may be required for construction purposes. 

The construction of the Canada Line, in Vancouver, is an interesting demonstration of subsoil rights: most of the line runs under public roads, but where the line crosses under Yaletown, it had to pass beneath condominium buildings.** The builders of the line had to pay the strata corporations for the right to tunnel beneath them**, even though the condos were not using the subsoil at that depth.

## Topic 5: Intentional Interference with Chattels

Please read the following case(s) referenced in the text (at p 332):

***Penfold’s Wines Pty. Ltd. v Elliott*** (1946), 74 C.L.R. 204 (H.C.A)

When it comes to chattels (movable goods/personal property), there are three major tort actions that the owner of the goods can rely on: **trespass to chattels**, **detinue**, and **conversion**. 

A fourth tort action, “**the action on the case to protect an owner’s reversionary interest**” is covered briefly in the text (at p 331) but is **rarely used in Canada**. 

The first of these actions is the oldest action, originating in the old trespass writs.

**Trespass to chattels**

In these actions, the plaintiff must show that there was some **direct interference with goods** in the plaintiff’s possession. The plaintiff does not necessarily have to own the chattel, **possession is sufficient**. In addition, the plaintiff need not prove actual damage, but there must be some sort of unlawful interference such as dispossession, damage, or prevention of use of the chattel by the owner.

You could sue under trespass to chattels for acts as serious as someone stealing your wallet, but that kind of claim is also covered by conversion (which we will get to below). What makes trespass to chattels stand out from detinue and conversion is that **it covers simpler acts such as a mere moving of a plaintiff’s possession, or possibly even mere touching**.

As with other trespass actions, the onus on the plaintiff is simple:

> prove direct interference with chattels. 

It is then up to the **defendant** to show that the interference was **not intentional and not negligent**. 

There is also the requirement here in trespass to prove that the **interference is physical** and that the chattel is a **physical object**. This issue arose in ***Century 21 Canada Limited Partnership v. Rogers Communications Inc.***, [2011 BCSC 1196](https://canlii.ca/t/fn00h){:target=" \_blank"} in the context of electronic interference and taking of electronic information (at p 326, note 211). In our current world dominated by rapidly changing information technology the court grappled with basic issues in the context of law that is still struggling to adapt to current technology.

**Detinue**

Actions in detinue involve the **wrongful detention of goods**. These claims usually begin when the defendant comes into possession of goods legitimately, but refuses to yield them to the owner, or to someone who has a stronger legal claim to the goods. Detainment of the goods is the key here. 

In these actions, the plaintiff must **prove**:

- plaintiff is either the **legal owner** of the chattel, or has a **better right** to possess the chattel than the defendant;
- plaintiff has **demanded the return** of the goods from the defendant; and
- defendant is **unlawfully and intentionally withholding** the goods

Historically, these actions involved **commercial** cases in which a bailee was holding one’s goods while in transit and then refused to turn the goods over. It expanded to cover **non-commercial** situations as well. So where someone found your lost wallet, and refused to return it to you after you demanded it back, an action in detinue could lie.

The main remedy for a detinue action, or at least the one that makes it unique, is the return of the chattel. It is the only one of the three chattel torts that has this remedy. So, **when your goal is to get the chattel back, you claim in detinue**. 

Courts typically refuse to order the return of chattels where damages are adequate compensation, e.g., because the chattel is an easily replaced “ordinary article of commerce.” **Unique articles**, however, are suitable for detinue. Courts tend to go do the default mode of damage awards, rather than making people do something.

As the text notes, **the plaintiff can sue for damages equal to the value of the chattel**. In that case, damages are assessed based on the **value** of the chattel **at the date of judgement** (not the date of the detainment), which can be important for goods whose market value fluctuates. Where the plaintiff sues for the return of the chattel and the chattel is damaged, the courts may award compensation for the damage, in addition to ordering its return. And in either claim, for return or for damages equal to the value, courts can also award “**consequential damages**” for harm resulting from the defendant’s withholding of the chattel.

**Conversion**

This is the newest and now the **most common action** of the three. In conversion cases, the defendant has unlawfully and intentionally converted or appropriated the plaintiff’s goods for the defendant’s own use. In short: **the defendant has behaved as if the goods belong to the defendant.** This can range from stealing goods, to borrowing and then deciding to keep goods, to borrowing and accidentally damaging or destroying them. There are also cases in which a defendant comes into possession of goods and sells them to third parties. In those cases and in cases of severe damage, **the only available remedy is damages equal to the value** of the goods, which is the usual remedy for conversion.

In these actions, the plaintiff must **prove**:

- either **ownership** of the chattel, or an **immediate right** to possession of the chattel, and
- defendant has **intentionally and substantially interfered** with the plaintiff’s right to the chattel.

What is “substantial interference”? See the text’s explanation of the concept of a forced sale and determining whether its fair and reasonable to force a defendant to pay full market value for the chattel (p 328).

In ***Fouldes v Willoughby*** (1841), 8 M. & W. 540, 151 E.R. 1153 (Ex. Ct.) the court found that no conversion had taken place as the defendant did **not attempt to exercise ownership** over the horses. This was found to be **a necessary element** of the tort. Instead, what we had here was “a simple asportation [i.e. carrying away] of a chattel, without any intention of making a further use of it”. **This may have been a trespass to chattels, but not a conversion**.

In comparison, ***Hollins v Fowler*** (1875), L.R. 7 H.L. 757 (H.L.) did involve a conversion (at p 329, note 221). The court determined that Hollins was liable in conversion. In the words of Blackburn J.:

> I think it is clear law, that if there has been what amounts in law to a conversion of the plaintiff’s goods, by any one, however innocent, that person must pay the value of the goods to the real owners, the plaintiffs.

A harsh rule, but we have seen this before: mistake is no defence to a claim for conversion. This does not, however, mean that anyone who comes into possession of goods may be sued for conversion: the case has to **meet the test** of the defendant treating the goods as if the defendant is the owner. Thus if a person finds goods and removes them to a place of safe keeping while trying to locate the rightful owner, there is no conversion.

As with trespass to chattels, **no actual damage is necessary**. If a defendant returns the chattel to the plaintiff and no actual damage is sustained, and the plaintiff accepts the chattel back, the plaintiff can still sue, though damages would be nominal. If, however, the chattel is destroyed or damaged, the plaintiff could get an order for the **market value** of the chattel at the date of conversion, **as well as consequential damages**.

Finally there is some uncertainty over the scope of conversion in Canada. At present **conversion** in Canada applies only to **tangible personal property**, i.e. goods.

<u>Action on the case to protect the owner’s reversionary interest</u>

This a very long-worded action for something that is **very rare** in Canada. The action on the case to protect the owner’s reversionary interest is designed to address those instances where a plaintiff doesn’t have current possession or immediate right to possession. Actual damage has to be proven in this action. You can probably guess why this action isn’t use very often as damage is usually brought through negligent action, and in Canada such actions are typically brought as negligence actions. 

If you’re feeling curious about this action you can read more about its history [here](http://www.nzlii.org/nz/journals/CanterLawRw/2011/20.pdf){:target=" \_blank"}.


## Topic 6: Intentional Interference with Economic Interests

Please read the following case(s) referenced in the text:

***Derry v Peek*** (1889), 14 App. Cas. 337 (H.L.)

In the commercial realm, disputes do not only revolve around the law of contract. Certain conduct committed against persons in business has been recognized by the courts as civil wrongs and actionable in tort. 

The scope of economic or business torts is vast. The text devotes most it attention to deceptive practices and improper market practice and we will only be reviewing these and a few related principles.

**Deceit**

The tort of deceit is similar to negligent misrepresentation, except that here the person making the representation knows that the statement is false. As outlined in the text (p 336) four elements are required to **prove the tort of deceit**:

- **False representation** or statement by defendant
- Defendant **knew the representation was false** (i.e., made dishonestly,statement was fraudulent) or made the statement **recklessly**, not knowing whether it was true or false (this is distinguished by an honest mistake)
- Statement **materially induced plaintiff to act** (i.e., to do some thing)
- Plaintiff **suffered damages**

The case that established these elements is ***Derry v Peek***, referenced in our text specifically as defining fraud (p 336, note 240). 

The plaintiff sued for a misrepresentation made in a tramway company’s prospectus. However, the plaintiff was not able to succeed under the tort of deceit, as the company’s directors honestly believed that the claim in the prospectus was substantially true. **The directors’ intent was not fraudulent enough: they were more stretching the truth, rather than lying about the steam-powered cars**; and they didn’t intend to deceive, since they thought that obtain the permissions was imminent, and just a formality. Also note that the claim was not to have the contract rescinded. 

That claim would have succeeded, since all that is needed is a misrepresentation (a statement that is not true). **For the tort of deceit, you need fraud**.

As to **what constitutes a misrepresentation**, usually this involves some positive act by the defendant: **words or actions that convey a meaning that is untrue**. For example, for a seller to promote only the good about a product and omit the bad is typically fraud, where the bad is not readily apparent to the buyer.

**What about silence as misrepresentation?** Usually **the failure to disclose information is not fraud**. There is no duty to disclose the truth. One exception is when the defendant has actively concealed the truth. Another one is where the defendant’s silence may be taken by the plaintiff to be a tacit confirmation of the false information.

The third element of deceit is crucial. **The plaintiff must have been induced by the misrepresentation somehow.** The necessity for the defendant to have intended their misrepresentation to be relied upon, and for the plaintiff to have relied upon it, is meant to address issues **causation**. There is no liability even in cases where a fraudulent misrepresentation is made but the plaintiff relies on their own independent judgment. This can be a tricky scenario, especially when its not completely clear if a misrepresentation influenced a plaintiff. 

The **principle** that the plaintiff must rely on the misrepresentation to prove deceit in ***Peck v Guerney***, (1873), L.R. 6 H.L. 377. It was held that silence, although morally questionable, did not in this case constitute grounds for misrepresentation. The court held that there must be some active mis-statement of fact, or partial stating of fact, to make the withheld information a case of misrepresentation. In ***Peck***, the court found that the plaintiff had not relied upon the prospectus to purchase the company’s shares.

In terms of the fourth element, **calculating damages** for deceit, two different methods have been considered by different jurisdictions. 

- In the United States, damages are to put the plaintiff in the position the plaintiff would be in **if the representation were true**, an award more like the “**expectation damages**” in contract cases. 
- In Canada, however, the calculation is based on putting the plaintiff in the position the plaintiff would have been in **if the representation not been made**, which is more in keeping with the traditional rule for torts awards. 

There is also some debate about the applicable of reasonable foreseeability or directness in remoteness of damage considerations in deceit. The text briefly refers to this discussion, noting rule of **direct consequences** is probably more appropriate (p 337).

**Injurious Falsehood**

The tort of injurious falsehood has some similarities to the tort defamation (which we’ll look at in an upcoming Module). It could be looked at slandering a trade, business or property although its more accurately the defendant being accused of making of a false statement about these matters, in a way that leads others not to engage in business with the plaintiff.

The essential elements for **proving injurious falsehood** include:

- A defendant must make **a false statement** concerning the plaintiff’s trade, business or property. A false statement can be about goods’ quality or labour competence, or it can cast doubts on the nature of the business, i.e. its legality, ethics, economic viability, etc.
- The false statement must be made **to a third person**, i.e. a potential customer, business partner, etc. The key point of this tort is to protect the plaintiff from false statements made by the plaintiff to a third party.
- The false statement has to be with **malicious intent**. In many of these cases malice is easy to prove. In some cases it is more difficult to prove a false statement was made maliciously and it’s necessary to prove that the plaintiff knew the statement was false (or was reckless in not seeking out the truth) and that **the damage was either intended or the likely result of the statement**.
- **Actual damage** to the plaintiff’s trade, business or property interests is required. This is similar to other torts we’ve discussed above.

Injurious falsehood as a tort is mirrored by legislation that is intended to promote fair market competition. The text references a provision of the federal *Trademarks Act*, [R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13](https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/t-13/FullText.html){:target=" \_blank"} that is designed to protect against a “false or misleading statement tending to discredit the business wares or services of a competitor.” (see p 339, note 249). **Proof of malice is not required for action under this statute.** 

**Passing-off**

Passing-off protects a plaintiff’s “goodwill.” Goodwill is generally defined as an **intangible business asset**, which generally includes a positive reputation. It does not include tangible assets. Goodwill does factor into the sale of a business as it can be allocated to a buyer in an amount equal to the value of the goodwill. 

The estimated value of goodwill can’t be calculated objectively and it generally depends on a number of **subjective factors**. There is federal legislation, in the form of the *Trademarks Act*, [R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13](https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/t-13/FullText.html){:target=" \_blank"} that touches on goodwill and creates a statutory action that complements the tort of passing-off (at ss 22 and 48):

> ***Depreciation of goodwill***

> 22 (1) No person shall use a trade-mark registered by another person in a manner that is likely to have the effect of depreciating the value of the goodwill attaching thereto.

> ***Trade-mark transferable***

> 48 (1) A trade-mark, whether registered or unregistered, is transferable, and deemed always to have been transferable, either in connection with or separately from the goodwill of the business and in respect of either all or some of the goods or services in association with which it has been used.

In addition to being aware of goodwill and its definition, you should know that passing-off actions have broadened in Canada to extend beyond the typical defendant’s misrepresentation of goodwill, i.e. a defendant pretending that their products are those of the plaintiff’s. It now includes a broad range of scenarios where goodwill is misrepresented to deceive consumers. As Osborne notes it has evolved from misrepresentation of goodwill to preventing misappropriation of a name. In this it is somewhat linked to our next sub-topic, misappropriation of personality, which is designed to protect a plaintiff’s goodwill in their name/character/personality.

**Misappropriation of personality**

The right of a person to control their name and likeness for commercial purposes applies both to celebrities and public figures, but is mainly used in cases where a defendant is accused of deceptively promoting their commercial product or service. 

**Advertising involving celebrities is a big area involving misappropriation of personality**. When a celebrity’s name or image is used to advertise or promote a product or service without that celebrity’s consent, it is a misappropriation of personality, and also an invasion of that celebrity’s privacy (albeit in a peculiar zone that mixes property and privacy interests). Action under this tort requires the person to have suffered **damages**, which are typically through analyzing the **market value of using the plaintiff’s name or image**. 

The primary relevance of the tort of misappropriation of personality, in today’s celebrity driven culture, is to typically recognize that the benefits received through a celebrity endorsing a particular product or service or company. A company is benefitting from that alleged endorsement and the tort is designed in practical terms to **prevent the improper use of a celebrity’s name or likeness**. This applies not only to celebrities but to any person but again in practical terms the tort is not often used in the context of the non-celebrity or non-public figure.

In terms of legislation that complements misappropriation of personality, in British Columbia it is dealt with under the invasion of privacy. Specifically, section 3 of the BC *Privacy Act*, [RSBC 1996, c 373](https://www.bclaws.gov.bc.ca/civix/document/id/complete/statreg/00_96373_01){:target=" \_blank"}, which is referenced in the text (p 344) along with other provincial legislation, protects against the unauthorized use of name or portrait of another person. 

As noted in the text, the statutory provisions differ from the tort in that they are actionable with proof of actual damage, but are not actionable after the person’s death.

**Conspiracy**

As you may have guessed, the tort of conspiracy involves at least **two people conspiring, lawfully or unlawfully, to cause economic damages to a third party**. 

**Simple conspiracy** arises when two parties agree to **lawfully** conspire to economically damage a third party. As you also may be wondering, simple conspiracy can be **difficult to distinguish from the intense market competition**. In today’s economy, simple conspiracy’s origins play an important part in its continued existence. Put simply, it existed primarily to discourage a defendant from primarily acting in a way as to **injure the plaintiff rather than** having a predominant intention to **promote their own products or services**. The purpose or motive is relevant here as courts consider conspiratorial actions in the context of giving a wide scope to most market and competitive activities, including the activities of organized labour. **Most actions related to industrial relations activities (i.e. legal strikes) do not form the basis for simple conspiracy.**

In Canada there is statutory protection that mirrors simple conspiracy in the federal *Competition Act*, [R.S.C. 1985, c. C-34](https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/c-34/fulltext.html){:target=" \_blank"}. Sections 3-6 of the *Competition Act* contain provisions relating to **evidence** required to prove conspiracy as well as **defences** that are available. 

An interesting section in the *Act*, s. 48, covers **professional sports**, and is excerpted below:

> 48 (1) Every one who conspires, combines, agrees or arranges with another person

> (a) to limit unreasonably the opportunities for any other person to participate, as a player or competitor, in professional sport or to impose unreasonable terms or conditions on those persons who so participate, or

> (b) to limit unreasonably the opportunity for any other person to negotiate with and, if agreement is reached, to play for the team or club of his choice in a professional league 

> is guilty of an indictable offence and liable on conviction to a fine in the discretion of the court or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to both.

A **second type of conspiracy** arises when **unlabwful** means are used. It’s much easier to sue and find liability for unlawful conspiracy when all the elements are present, i.e. two or more parties engage in coordinated, unlawful activity intended to likely damage a third party. The key here is defining “unlawful activity” which courts, as the text notes, have defined broadly, with some limitations (see p 348 and note 275 for examples).

**A note on justification**

Although we are covering defences to intentional torts separately below, **justification is a potential unique defence to conspiracy and related economic claims**, but as the text notes its unlikely to play a significant role here. It is seen in both inducing breach and unlawful intereference claims, which we’ll cover below. 

Inducing conspiracy, or a breach or interfering with economic relations can, in some instances, be justified for the pursuit of a legitimate goal. The scope of the defence is not clear, however, and in Canada courts apply it in very limited circumstances in Canada. **Moral goals are often not sufficient justification** to override the unlawful act of a defendant.

***Brimelow v Casson*** [1924] 1 Ch. 302 is one case in which the court accepted the defence, and is referenced in our text under inducement to breach (p 353, note 295). “Chorus girls” performing in a burlesque troupe were underpaid by the plaintiff troupe owner. They were so underpaid that the women had to resort to prostitution to support themselves. The defendants were actors who formed a Joint Protection Committee to promote fair wages. They persuaded theatre owners to boycott the plaintiff by breaking their contracts with him, unless he paid higher wages. The court found that the **defendant’s unlawful conduct was justified** in these circumstances.

**Intimidation**

This tort makes an interesting companion to the interference/breach cases that we will cover below. The leading case of ***Rookes v Barnard*** [1964] A.C. 1129 (H.L.) is based on a labour dispute (p 349, note 279). Here the Court **endorses two branches of the tort of intimidation**, quoting at length from Salmond:

- Intimidation of the plaintiff by threats of illegal action against that person, which cause the plaintiff to do something that causes loss to the plaintiff
- Intimidation of others, causing them to do something that harms the plaintiff

This branch of tort law does not make threats, alone, into a tort. In each case, the key elements are not just **(a)** **threats** of illegal acts, but that **(b)** the threats cause the plaintiff or the third parties to do something that causes **loss** to the plaintiff. Note that it can be a tort to intimidate third parties into doing something that causes harm to the plaintiff, **even if the actions the third parties take are acts they are legally entitled to do**.

**Inducing breach of contract**

The tort of inducing breach of contract involves a defendant intentionally persuading a party to break their contract with the plaintiff. **The inducement can be direct or indirect.**

<u>Direct inducement</u>

This tort had its origins in the 14th century to prevent people from stealing away other people’s servants. It now covers any situation involving the following elements:

- **Valid contract** between plaintiff and third party;
- Defendant **knows** of contract;
- Defendant **intends** for third party to break contract with plaintiff;
- Defendant’s conduct **actually causes** third party to break contract with plaintiff; and
- Plaintiff suffers **damages**.

***Lumley v Gye*** (1853), 2 E. & B. 216, 118 E.R. 749 (Q.B.) is the pivotal case for this tort. Today, for the intent aspect of the tort, the law **no longer requires malice, unlawful act, or intention** to harm as an element of intent. The only intent element still required is, as in the list above, the intent to induce breach of the contract.

This type of direct inducement has been described recently by the House of Lords as “accessory liability,” since the defendant is liable as an accessory to the breach of the third party’s contract with the plaintiff. There is a direct relationship between the tortfeasor and the person who breaches the contract with the plaintiff.

Cases that do not involve direct inducement, but where the breach of contract is procured through indirect means, are also actionable in tort.

<u>Indirect inducement</u>

The **first expansion** of the tort of inducing breach of contract extended it to include situations where a defendant uses indirect means to procure breach of a third party’s contract with the plaintiff. 

**An example:** a defendant indirectly induces the third party to break its contract with the plaintiff by committing an unlawful act, such as removing the tools or equipment of the third party’s employee, or physically detaining the employee, so that the employee cannot perform the duties. 

For indirect inducement cases, the elements that need to be **proved** are the **same as for direct inducement**, **except that procurement of the breach is through indirect means that is unlawful** (e.g., stealing the equipment, detaining the employee, etc.).

As the tort has developed, indirect inducement cases are coming to be categorized differently. Instead of being a subset of “inducing breach” cases, **courts are starting to deal with them under the broader heading of “unlawful interference,” discussed next**.

**Interference with a contract by unlawful means**

The recognition of indirect inducement opened the door to this tort. The next step was to allow recovery in cases in which no contract is actually breached, but there is measurable interference with contractual performance by a third party.

This tort is **broader than inducement**, as the defendant’s act need **not necessarily result in a breach of contract**. The factors the plaintiff must **prove** are:

- Defendant **aware** of this contractual relationship
- Defendant, through **unlawful** means, **intends** to interfere with contractual performance
- Plaintiff suffers **economic harm**

The element of intention to injure the plaintiff is important. It is **not enough** to satisfy this element if the defendant’s main intention was **self-interest**, even if the plaintiff’s economic interests were affected. The defendant’s conduct must intentionally target the plaintiff.

For the element of **unlawful means**, this can be any **tortious, criminal other wrongful act**. In ***Torquay Hotel Co Ltd v Cousins*** (1969, UK CA), Lord Denning defined unlawful means as any act which the defendant is “not at liberty to commit” (see p 355, note 302).

Similarly, in ***Torquay***, Lord Denning also adopted a broad definition of what constitutes interference. It is sufficient if the defendant interferes with the “trade or business of another”, and need not actually procure breach of the plaintiff’s contract with a third party. In fact, **there need not even be a pre-existing contractual relationship**. Some sort of interference with the plaintiff’s business interests is enough.

As the text infers, it’s an **open question** whether ***Torquay*** been accepted in Canada. The tort is still evolving and has yet to be confirmed by the Supreme Court of Canada.

## Module 7 - Topic 6: Practice Questions

!!! danger "Quiz"

    1. **Simple conspiracy** is more difficult to prove in legal strike as opposed to a wildcat (illegal) strike. 
        - [x] True
        - [ ] False
    > Courts consider conspiratorial actions in the context of giving a wide scope to most market and competitive activities, including the activities of organized labour. **Most actions related to industrial relations activities (i.e. legal strikes) do not form the basis for simple conspiracy.**

## Topic 7: Defences to Intentional Torts

Please read the following case(s) referenced in the text:

***Non-Marine Underwriters, Lloyd's of London v. Scalera***, [2000 SCC 24](https://canlii.ca/t/526l){:target=" \_blank"}

Proving the elements of trespass to land (or any other intentional tort for that matter) as distinguished from “defences.” 

In a civil lawsuit the first step the defendant takes is to try to disprove each of the elements of the types of actions that we reviewed above, i.e., to convince the court that the plaintiff has not proved those elements. After arguing about whether the plaintiff has proved the elements, the defendant turns to the “defences” that we will examine.

**Defences are the arguments the defendant has the onus to prove**

In that sense, it is misleading to call these the “defences,” since it implies that they are the only things the defendant argues in court. They are only part of the defence against a claim. It bears repeating that what makes “defences” special is that the **defendant has the onus of proving them**. 

If look back to our study of negligence law, you will recall that the plaintiff has to prove all elements of negligence to succeed. The plaintiff has the onus to prove those elements, or the claim fails. The defendant will not, however, just sit back and let the plaintiff lead evidence on these elements. The defendant will argue that there was no duty of care in this case, or that the defendant took reasonable care, etc., for each element. The defendant will point to the law on each element and apply it to the facts to support these arguments. The defendant does not have the onus to do this, but strategically it would be foolish not to do so, since it is not that hard for the plaintiff to prove the elements on a balance of probabilities.

After all that arguing is done, and for example you should do this arguing as part of an answer to a case problem on an exam, you move on to the **“defences” that can negate liability even when the plaintiff has proved all the elements**.

**The "defence" of lack of intent**

When it comes to most of the intentional torts, lack of intent is actually a defence, even though we have looked at it as part of the elements of the tort.

That is because for the intentional torts based in **trespass actions** (which is most of them), **the plaintiff does not need to prove “intention”, it is the defendant that has the onus to prove lack of intent**. 

For trespass to the person, to land, and to chattels, the plaintiff need only **prove direct interference**. The nature of the direct interference varies from tort to tort, but that’s all the plaintiff must prove for trespass actions (Note: a plaintiff has a higher burden for some of the newer torts we examined, such as intentional infliction of nervous shock, violations of privacy, detinue, and conversion).

As with any element that the plaintiff must prove, the defendant will also try to **disprove directness**. But if the plaintiff wins that tug-of-war (i.e., after hearing arguments of the plaintiff and the defendant, the judge thinks it more likely than not that there was a direct interference), **the defendant will be liable unless the defendant can prove lack of intention, or one of the following defences:**

- **consent** by the plaintiff or **self-defence**
- a special context involving **necessity** or **legal authority** defence

**Defence of consent**

Consent means a person has agreed or given permission to another person to commit the interference in question. In Canada, the **burden of proving that the plaintiff consented to the interference rests with the defendant**.

Consent can be given **expressly** (i.e., a statement made by the plaintiff either verbally or in writing) or **impliedly** (i.e., through the plaintiff’s conduct). In the latter case, consent is implied if the plaintiff’s conduct reasonably suggests that the plaintiff agreed to the defendant’s act, or voluntarily participated in the activity. 

Although conduct can amount to implied consent, you should not forget that it is the defendant who has the onus to prove consent. There is a bit of **a reasonableness test** built into the analysis of implied consent (i.e., **would a reasonable person have seen the plaintiff’s conduct as indicating consent**, even if the plaintiff now says it was not consent), but it is the defendant who must prove that this was consent.

**Onus of proof in sexual battery**

The rape claims, which in the past came close to being a presumption of consent that the victim of rape would have to overturn, in both criminal and civil cases. In ***Non-Marine Underwriters***, **McLachlin J** deals with the definition of battery as “conduct that is ‘harmful or offensive’”. The phrase “harmful or offensive” does not require the plaintiff to prove lack of consent, or other forms of harmfulness. It merely excludes from battery claims two narrow situations, grouped under two theories related to consent (para 20):

- “**implied consent theory**”: where consent is automatically implied by law
- “**exception theory**”: for “conduct generally acceptable in ordinary life”

Both of these theories exclude certain contacts from battery, and do not require the defendant to disprove battery. **McLachlin J** leaves no doubt that **sexual contact does not fall into either of these theories**. She says several times, the “law of battery protects the inviolability of the person”. There is no context in which the personal autonomy, a person’s right to decide whether to make physical contact, is more important than in the case of sexual contact.

**Competence to consent (capacity)**

Before consent can be valid, the party must have **competency to consent**, which means that
 
- (a) consent is given **voluntarily**, and 
- (b) the party **understands** the nature and consequences of the act to which he/she is consenting. 

Young children and the mentally disabled may not have the required competency to consent. In addition, the elderly and persons who do not have mental competency due to drugs or alcohol, may also not be able to consent.

<u>Special contexts of consent: sports</u>

The text refers to two approaches courts have taken to sports and battery, but when a party voluntarily participates in sports, the person is taken to have consented to the ordinary risks of the sport (p 299). 

So long as there is **no malice, anger or ill will** on the other party (mirroring the approach taken by the BC Court of Appeal, incorporating a negligence analysis) consent will generally be a defence to any physical contact or battery resulting from the sport, without need for the defendant to point to specific facts proving consent, beyond the fact of the parties’ willing participation in the sport, including the fact that the defendant was indeed invited to join the sport, and has not butted in. (See Scalera on “implied consent theory”). Thus courts say a boxer has consented to some contact by the opponent in a boxing match. **Spectators** also impliedly consent to injuries incidental to attending a sporting event (such as being hit by a ball in a baseball game).

Once the defendant proves the sporting context, it is up to the plaintiff to prove that the defendant **exceeded the consent**, e.g., due to malice, anger, ill will, or acts that go beyond normal contact for that sport. 

However, when might consent be exceeded? This is a more difficult question. The courts generally view consent as being exceeded where the **physical contact is beyond the ordinary risks** of the sport, or **outside the rules of fair play**, a person is not seen to have consented to risks outside the scope of the sport.

In ***Agar v. Canning***, [1966 CanLII 578 (MB CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/g9xnb){:target=" \_blank"}, the courts ruled that there was no consent because that type of contact was not an ordinary risk of hockey. If a defendant commits a tort (such as battery) against another where there has been a definite resolve to cause injury, he will not be able to prove that the plaintiff consented to that act. In ***Agar***, the court did however reduce damages to take into account provocation by the plaintiff.

<u>Fist fights</u>

The law for fist fights, typically sparked by anger, is similar to that for sports (pp 299-301). **If the fight seems to mutually erupt from an argument, then both parties are seen to have consented to the risk of physical harm.** If the fighting goes beyond mutual blows and becomes excessively one-sided, the consent may be exceeded.

**Defence of self-defence**

Defending oneself or, in some cases, a third party, is a defence to what would normally be a tortious act.  

A person is permitted to use "reasonable force" to repel an actual violent attack/assault (e.g. tort of battery) or imminent threat of violent attack/assault (e.g. tort of assault).  What is "**reasonable force**"?  It depends on the context, but involves considering the context of the act(s), including:

- nature of the attack/threat
- physical size/strength of opponent
- any use of weaponry by attacker (or defender)
- force needed to repel the attack
- any other alternative to using violence to repel the attack/threat

Whatever **actions** are taken in self-defence, they have to be perceived as entirely **defensive in nature**.  Acting in self-defence doesn't permit you **unnecessary** violence (i.e. going beyond defending yourself to take measures that are seen as punishing the attacker) nor does it permit **disproportionately** violent acts.  

As the text notes, you are not required to measure force or threat of force with "**nicety**" or "**delicate calibration**."  You just have to take measures necessary to protect yourself to avail yourself of the defence.

In terms of defending other person(s) (**Defence of 3rd person**) - the **factors mirror those of self-defence.**  You are entitled to use whatever reasonable force is necessary in the circumstances to protect someone else who is being assaulted or threatened with assault.

## Topic 8 - Special contexts

**Special contexts of consent: medical care**

As we learned, physicians have **a duty to inform** patients of the risks of any medical procedure or treatment, and that a patient has **an action in negligence** if that duty is not discharged. 

The patient must be able to freely give full and informed consent, **whether express or implied**. If, however, **no consent is obtained**, and the doctor carries out a medical treatment or procedure, **the doctor has committed a battery**. An action for battery may also lie if consent that is given has been **exceeded**, or the consent was obtained **through fraud**.

There are **two exceptions** to this general rule that consent to a medical procedure must be obtained from the patient before the procedure takes place: 

- (1) in emergencies and 
- (2) where the procedure in question is incidental to the main procedure for which consent was already obtained. In those situations, consent is implied.

However, if a patient refuses treatment, no consent may be implied even in emergency situations. The strength of this rule is apparent in ***Malette v. Shulman*** (Ont. C.A.), [1990 CanLII 6868 (ON CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/g1757){:target=" \_blank"} where the plaintiff, a Jehovah’s Witness, was seriously injured in a car accident and required a blood transfusion (p 300, note 131). She carried a card in her purse that forbade transfusions. The defendant doctor, due to the exigencies of the situation, nevertheless administered the transfusion. The plaintiff sued the doctor. **Her action in battery was successful** on the grounds that **a patient has the right to determine what treatment to accept or reject, even in emergency situations**.

**Canadian courts are not willing to allow parents to deny emergency blood transfusions to their children.** These medical cases, not just those involving religious convictions, are difficult and involve medical situations with complex ethical and legal issues. 

**Legislation on health care and consent**

In British Columbia, the *Health Care (Consent) and Care Facility (Admission) Act*, [RSBC 1996, c 181](https://www.bclaws.gov.bc.ca/civix/document/id/complete/statreg/96181_01){:target=" \_blank"} legislates the giving of **consent by adults** as it relates to health care. It reaffirms that free and full consent is required for health care, covers emergency situations, and outlines the rules relating to substitute consent where an adult is not able to give consent. See in particular sections 4-6, 9, 11-12.

In the case of minors, **section 17** of the *Infants Act*, [RSBC 1996, c 223](https://www.bclaws.gov.bc.ca/civix/document/id/complete/statreg/96223_01){:target=" \_blank"} allows minors to give consent to medical procedures without the consent of their parents or guardians. Two conditions must be satisfied:

- The health professional has **explained** to the infant and has been satisfied that the infant understands the nature and consequences and the reasonably foreseeable benefits and risks of the health care, and
- The health professional has made reasonable efforts to determine and has concluded that the health care is in the infant's **best interests**.

Section 17 will generally apply to cases involving “mature minors,” who may be old enough to make decisions pertaining to their health but may not want parental involvement.

Even when consent is given, it may be invalidated for a number of reasons. Where a defendant has proven that the plaintiff consented to the tort, the plaintiff can argue that the consent was vitiated. The burden is on the plaintiff to prove that the consent should be negated. 

There are four main bases for vitiating consent. Factors that may **vitiate consent** include: **Duress**, **fraud**, **mistake** and **public policy**.

<u>Duress</u>

When determining whether a plaintiff has consented to the interference in question, duress is relevant. Where the plaintiff’s consent has been obtained under force, threat of force or violence, or some other unlawful act, **duress will negate any consent that is given**. In those cases, the consent was not freely given. Other forms of duress, such as **economic pressures, however do not invalidate consent**.

<u>Fraud (deceit)</u>

For fraud or deceit to vitiate consent, the plaintiff must **prove** two elements:

- Defendant was aware of, or responsible for, the plaintiff’s **misapprehension**
- The fraud **related** to the act itself and not some collateral matter

For example, in ***R. v. Cuerrier***, [1998 CanLII 796 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fqr9){:target=" \_blank"} the defendant did not inform the plaintiff that he had HIV before engaging in unprotected sex with her. The Supreme Court found that consent was vitiated due to fraud. 

<u>Public policy</u>

Consent can be vitiated for public policy reasons, such as in some sexual assault cases. However, in some circumstances, the Courts have questioned whether the victim’s participation was really “voluntary”. This arises particularly in cases where there is an **unequal power imbalance** between the two parties, such as in teacher-student or doctor-patient relationships.

This is where the case of ***Norberg v. Wynrib***, [1992 CanLII 65 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fs90){:target=" \_blank"} is most relevant (pp 300-301, note 133). The Supreme Court held that “no meaningful consent” could be given where there is:

- **inequality** in the position of the parties (“power dependency” relationship), and
- **exploitation** of that inequality (consider relationship in light of community standards)

Under this reasoning, where the party in the **stronger bargaining position** exploits its position of authority (such as here, where the doctor misused his position vis-a-vis his patient), for public policy reasons any consent given by the weaker party is thus vitiated.

**Consent to criminal or immoral acts**

At common law, if the plaintiff was engaged in a criminal or immoral act at the time the intentional tort occurred, courts dismissed the claim: They deemed that the plaintiff had consented. This is the defence of *ex turpi causa*. This defence is very **narrow** now, an only applies in **personal injury claims** if necessary to protect the integrity of the legal system and prevent conflict between civil and criminal law (i.e. permit a plaintiff to profit from wrongdoing). Recall the Supreme Court of Canada decision in ***British Columbia v. Zastowny***, [2008 SCC 4](https://canlii.ca/t/1vmgv){:target=" \_blank"}. 

**A note on trespass to land defences**

Owners and occupiers of property have a right to control who enters their property. If force is used to remove someone from the property, the occupier could be held to have committed an assault and battery. However, the occupier may avoid liability by claiming “**defence of real property**.”

When it comes to the defence of real property, three general scenarios arise: 

- the trespasser enters **non-violently**; 
- the trespasser enters **violently**; or 
- the occupier wishes to protect the premises from trespassers, e.g., **with traps or dogs**.

For non-violent trespassers, the general rule is that the owner/occupier must **first request that the trespasser leave and give him a reasonable opportunity to do so peaceably**. If the trespasser still remains on the property, then the owner/occupier is permitted to use reasonable force to eject the trespasser. Beating of the trespasser is not permitted under this defence, only reasonable force to eject the trespasser.

If the trespasser enters the property by force, however, the owner/occupier need not first request that the trespasser leave: the trespasser may be forcibly ejected without notice.

What about the situation where an occupier wishes to protect premises from trespassers? Can an occupier use force to protect land, e.g., by erecting a barbed wire fence around the premises? The courts have applied the **test of reasonableness** to these situations. Such a fence must be for deterring and repelling intruders, not catching and injuring them.

**A note on defences of chattels**

There is less material on this topic than on defence of land, but it is an equally interesting area of the defence of property, and due to different factual scenarios from defence of property, the rules are somewhat different. A person is permitted to use r**easonable force to defend their chattels**, in a similar way as defending real property.

The defence of recapture of property is covered at pp 329-330, but this defence is worth a closer review. If a person has come into possession of the chattel lawfully (e.g., bailment situations where someone is **lawfully** holding the chattel for you, but they do not release the chattel back to you), the **lawful owner may not use force, whether reasonable or not, to recapture the chattel**. That person could, however, commence an action in detinue or conversion.

Where however a person has **unlawfully** taken another’s goods, the **lawful owner is entitled to recapture those goods**. This is a common law privilege. **Reasonable force may be used, but only after a request for return of the chattels is denied.** This applies in “pursuit cases”, where the owner of the goods can use reasonable force when chasing someone who has just stolen his goods. As well, a person who is trying to recapture his chattels may trespass on another’s property, if the chattel is taken onto the property by that other person’s wrongful act.

In 2012, the federal *Citizen’s Arrest and Self-defence Act*, [SC 2012, c 9](https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/annualstatutes/2012_9/fulltext.html){:target=" \_blank"}, rewrote s 35 of the *Criminal Code*, on defence of property (land or chattels), and modified the defence-of-property portions of s 494. 

**Defence of public or private necessity**

Sometimes a person may be justified in committing a tortious act if the person was acting **out of public necessity** or in an **emergency situation to protect himself**.

A **public necessity defence** relates to **trespass** or **destruction of a person’s real property** for the purpose of some **public good**. There is generally some external danger, and the person whose property is affected is an innocent party who has to sacrifice his property for the greater public good. 

For the defence to be invoked, the party committing the trespass or destruction of property must be **acting reasonably in response to an imminent peril**. **Mistake will not negate the defence.** When the defence of public necessity applies, the plaintiff will **not be able to recover** for the damage to the property.

In **private necessity** cases, the trespass of another’s property is in **response to an imminent peril to the defendant’s own person or property**. Such interference will be justified if **the harm avoided is greater than the interference with the plaintiff’s property**. The difference from public necessity is that the **defendant will be responsible for compensating the plaintiff for any damage** caused to the plaintiff’s property by the trespass. Thus, this is not a full defence, unless there is no actual damage.

***Vincent v Lake Erie Transportation Co*** (1910, Minn SC), mentioned in our text in the context of emergency sitations (p 315, note 173) illustrates this rule. 

Note that the defence of necessity apply mainly to trespass to land. **Necessity is not commonly a defence available in trespass to person or chattel cases** and only available in those cases in narrow circumstances.

**Defence of Legal authorization**

If a statute authorizes the use of reasonable force or detention, a party carrying out that force or detention is justified in doing so. This is the defence of legal authority. The defence is commonly raised in **two situations**: 

- those involving the exercise of **police authority**, and 
- those involving **disciplining children**.

<u>Police authority</u>

A police officer (or other authorized person) who assaults, batters or falsely imprisons a person may claim the defence of legal authority to do so under the **ss 25 and 495** of the *Criminal Code*.

Note the following rules about when the defence applies:

- The police officer must show that the officer had **reasonable grounds** to believe that the plaintiff has committed a criminal offence, is committing a criminal offence, or poses a threat to another person, before using reasonable force or detaining the plaintiff.
- In assault and battery cases, the use of force by the police must be **reasonable**. You can probably think of many instances where officers have been accused of police brutality.
- Reasonable force can be used not only in **arrests** but in **bodily searches** of those under arrest. Reasonableness can depend not just on “force” but on how invasive the search was, but even an invasive action can be protected by the defence. In false imprisonment cases, a suspect has the right to know the reasons for arrest. **If no reason is given, then the arrest is unlawful, and no defence of legal authority is available.**

Police officers are also permitted to **trespass on land without a warrant to arrest a suspect**, if they have reasonable grounds to believe the person is on the premises, and they announce their entry to the occupier.

Police have greater protection under the *Criminal Code* than do regular people, naturally enough, but **s 494** also provides a more limited protection for people who engage in **“citizen’s arrest”** style acts. They may arrest people they see: 

- **committing** serious crimes; 
- **escaping** for the police; or 
- **taking** the person’s property. 

For tort claims, this protection supplements the protection provided by defence of third parties and defence of property. In 2012, the *Citizen’s Arrest and Self-defence Act*, [SC 2012, c 9](https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/annualstatutes/2012_9/fulltext.html){:target=" \_blank"} (mentioned above, under protection of property) amended s 494, replacing subsection (2) and adding a new subsection (4).

<u>Disciplining children</u>

We now know that **s. 43** of the *Criminal Code* allows parents and teachers to **use reasonable force to discipline children**, and that such action would not constitute a criminal assault or civil assault or battery. This is also known as the **defence of discipline**.

Remember that, as s 43 is applied today, the force used must be **reasonable** and **not result in harm to the child**. Further, the force is to be applied **for a corrective purpose**, which has been interpreted by the courts to mean **for the “educational benefit” of the child and not for punishment**. The test as to what is reasonable is an objective test. Subjective views of teachers or parents regarding discipline or religion are irrelevant.

In determining whether the force used was reasonable, courts consider the:

- child’s age and character;
- effect of the punishment on the child;
- degree of gravity of the punishment;
- surrounding circumstances; and
- injuries, if any (a serious injury would always be considered unreasonable).

**Notes on mistake and duress (inoperative defences relating to intent)**

A **mistake** or **voluntary acting under duress**, however, are **not defences** (see p 308-309). 

Mistake occurs where a defendant has intent to commit the act, but is mistaken about the factual or legal circumstances. This can be a bit confusing but the key point to remember is that the **actual action** (i.e. intrusion on the plaintiff’s land) has to be **intentional**. **Motive also doesn’t matter, nor does a mistaken belief that the intent is justified** (i.e. a mistaken belief that cutting someone else’s lawn is cutting your own grass). 

***Basely v Clarkson*** (1681), 3 Lev. 37, 83 E.R. 565 (C.P.). ... The defendant was liable, since he had directly and intentionally (i.e., he intended to cut the grass) interfered with the plaintiff’s property. 

Mistake about your legal duties is also not a defence in tort. If the intent to bring about the consequences was voluntary, mistake of fact or of law will not relieve the defendant from liability. **It may, however, reduce the damage award.**

In terms of duress, a classic example is an armed person A holding a gun on person B and telling him to enter person C’s house to steal some items. Person B would be liable to Person C for trespass (to land and chattel). 

Drinking to the point of intoxication is another area where **courts generally refused to consider drunkenness as a negation of voluntariness** on the grounds that a person voluntarily chose to drink to excess and get drunk. 

## Module 7 Summary

Over the past two weeks in this Module we have surveyed various intentional torts, including trespass and interferences to the person, land, chattels and economic interests. 

In the second part of this module we have reviewed defences available to a defendant in intentional torts, and who has the onus of proving their different aspects.

The **common thread** running through all of the intentional torts, unsurprisingly, is the requirement for the **defendant to have acted intentionally**.

## Textbook Summary: pp 265-356

**Chapter 4: Intentional Torts**

**B. THE MEANING OF INTENTION**

Intent commonly connotes **a subjective desire** to cause the consequences of one’s actions. Conduct is also intentional if the consequences, while not desired, are **substantially certain to result** from the defendant’s conduct. In such circumstances, the defendant is said to have **constructive or imputed intent**.

The definition of intent has been extended further by the concept of **transferred intent**. It arises, for example, where A intends to shoot B but misses and hits C, whom A had no actual intention to injure. It has even been suggested that intention may be **transferred from one intentional tort to another**. It may apply, for example, when A intends to shoot B (a battery) but misses and hits C’s automobile (trespass to chattels).

A defendant may be incapacitated from forming the requisite intent by **mental disability or infancy**. The caselaw does not speak with a single voice but the predominant view is that **a defendant is not liable if he did not understand the nature and quality of his act**.4 A defendant will, **however**, be liable if he knew what he was doing but did not know it was wrong.

**C. INTENTIONAL INTERFERENCE WITH THE PERSON**

There are several individual nominate torts dealing with the intentional interference with the person. Each tort protects the plaintiff from the intentional interference of a discrete personal interest such as **bodily security (battery)**, **freedom from threats of violence (assault)**, **liberty (false imprisonment and malicious prosecution)**, **psychological security (intentional infliction of nervous shock)**, and **privacy (the tort of invasion of privacy)**. 

**(1) Battery**

A direct, intentional, and physical interference with the person of another that is either harmful or offensive to a reasonable person is
a battery. Freedom from physical interference is so highly valued that battery is **actionable without proof of damage**.

**Directness** remains an essential requirement for liability not only in battery but in all the intentional torts that trace their origin to the writ of trespass (battery, assault, false imprisonment, trespass to land, and trespass to chattels). There is little modern justification for this dichotomy between direct and indirect acts, however.

A further characteristic of the tort of battery, is that, in contrast to the tort of negligence, the **burden of proof** in respect of the wrongfulness of the defendant’s conduct is **on the defendant**.

The defendant is **liable for all the consequences** of his battery. This broader rule of remoteness of damage, which is probably applicable to all of the intentional torts, is justified on the grounds that the defendant’s conduct, being intentional, carries the stain of moral culpability, which warrants a more extensive responsibility.

Limitation Period:

in ***M.(K.) v. M.(H.)***, [1992 CanLII 31 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fs89){:target=" \_blank"}, a case of childhood incest. The Court held that the cause of action, from which time runs, **does not arise until the survivor of the incest has a complete and full understanding** of both the wrongfulness of the defendant’s act and the causal relationship between those acts and the psychological and emotional consequences of the acts in adulthood.

In most provinces, this discoverability principle has been complemented by l**egislative initiatives that dispense with limitation periods** for sexual misconduct, including sexual assault, in carefully defined circumstances.

**(2) Assault**

Strictly speaking, however, an assault in tort law is the **threat of an immediate battery**. Any direct and intentional act that causes a person to apprehend immediate harmful or offensive bodily contact is an assault. 

The plaintiff must actually apprehend an **immediate** battery and that apprehension must be **reasonable** in the circumstances. There is also no need to prove any physical damage. The apprehension of imminent contact is enough.

Threats of future violence will not suffice.

The modern view is that **a threat of violence coupled with a condition** that the speaker has no right to impose, the compliance with which is essential to purchase one’s safety, is an assault.

**(3) False Imprisonment**

A direct intentional26 imprisonment of another person is a false imprisonment. It is **actionable without proof of damage**. 

There must be a complete restriction on the plaintiff’s physical liberty. This was established in ***Bird v Jones*** (1845), 7 QBR 742, 115 ER 668 (QB). It was held that a partial obstruction and disturbance of a right of way is not a false imprisonment. There must be a complete detention of the plaintiff.

If the person is intimidated by a show of authority, afraid of the consequences of refusal, apprehends the use of force, or is seeking solely to avoid public embarrassment, he may be imprisoned and the defendant will be required to **justify the detention** on the ground of her legal authority to arrest the person.

There is no Canadian authority on whether or not the plaintiff must be conscious of their imprisonment. Consequently, a remedy is probably available to kidnapped infants and mentally incompetent adults who, because of age or an illness such as Alzheimer’s disease, are **unaware of their detention**.

**(4) Malicious Prosecution**

The requirements of malicious prosecution are well established. The plaintiff must prove.

- that the defendant initiated the **proceedings against the plaintiff**, 
- that the **proceedings terminated in the plaintiff’s favour**, 
- that there was **no reasonable and probable cause** for the proceedings, 
- that there was **malice on the part of the defendant**, and 
- that the plaintiff **sustained damage**. 

These criteria are notoriously **difficult to establish** but the courts to date have exhibited little enthusiasm to relax them and widen the scope of liability. 

The application of malicious prosecution to Crown prosecutors was clarified in the decision of the Supreme Court in ***Miazga v. Kvello Estate***, [2009 SCC 51](https://canlii.ca/t/26g27){:target=" \_blank"}.

**(8) Abuse of Process** 

The tort of abuse of process is applicable in respect of the improper use of the **civil litigation process**. 

There are four elements of the tort. 

- First, the defendant must have brought the **civil action** or process. 
- Second, the proceedings must be brought for a collateral and **improper purpose**. 
- Third, there must be evidence of some **overt act or threat, independent of the litigation**, designed to secure the defendant’s improper purpose. 
- Fourth, the plaintiff must prove **damage**.

The malicious use of the litigation process is **not, in itself, actionable**. There must in addition be proof of some overt act, independent of the litigation, that is designed to advance the defendant’s wrongful purpose

**(9) Intentional Infliction of Nervous Shock**

Liability for the intentional infliction of nervous shock was first recognized in the famous case of ***Wilkinson v Downton*** [1897] 2 QB 57. 

There are three elements that make up the tort of intentional infliction of nervous shock. 

- First, there must be **outrageous or flagrant conduct**. A number of cases involve a single shocking event similar to that in Wilkinson. Others address a pattern of behaviour such as emotional abuse, cyber-bullying, harassment, and intimidation. 
- Second, there must be proof of actual **intent** or, as in ***Wilkinson***, constructive intent to cause harm of the kind suffered. There are instances where “constructive intent” has been interpreted to include conduct where there was less than a substantial certainty that harm would occur. 
- Third, the plaintiff must prove nervous shock which is defined, as it is in the tort of negligence, as a **recognizable psychiatric illness or physical harm**.  In recent years, however, there has been some relaxation in the interpretation of nervous shock and, the courts are edging towards recognizing severe emotional stress as sufficient, particularly where the defendant’s conduct is utterly outrageous.

**(10) Privacy** 

There is no consistent approach to liability for the invasion of privacy in Canada. In some provinces, the common law applies. In four provinces, British Columbia, Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and Newfoundland and Labrador, **privacy acts** have created a statutory tort.

In the past few decades there have been indications that the courts were moving towards the recognition of **a discrete tort of privacy**. The first step was the recognition of a remedy for the misappropriation of a person’s name or likeness for commercial purposes.

Support for a discrete tort of invasion of privacy was also provided by other persuasive sources. Section 8 of the *Charter of Rights and Freedoms* protects citizens from unreasonable search and seizure thereby enshrining privacy as a concept worthy of constitutional protection.

The tort was extended to the unauthorized publication of private information in ***Jane Doe 464533 v N.D.***, [2017 ONSC 127](https://canlii.ca/t/gwrjt){:target=" \_blank"}. It was a case of “revenge pornography.” The court imposed liability, holding that the publication was highly offensive to a reasonable person and the public had no legitimate interest in it.

The **privacy acts** are not a **panacea** but they do provide some pro- tection of privacy and they are likely to be useful and influential in the development of the common law in those provinces without a statutory tort.

**(11) Discrimination**




















 

