---
layout: post
title: L503 Module 10
date: 2026-04-02
draft: false
categories:
  - Law
tags:
  - LAW_V 503E E_99C 2025W2 Tort Law - Tort Law
  - Module 10
---

# Special Topics in Negligence.

## Overview

First we’ll look at the field of **consumer products and products liability**. The duty of care recognized in ***Donoghue*** formed the basis for manufacturers’ duty to warn of inherent dangers in products and to design them with reasonable care. 

Then we’ll look at **occupiers’ liability** and the peculiar care owed by **landowners to those who are on their property** and we’ll then turn to pure economic loss, and specifically focusing on **negligent misrepresentation** (i.e. making a claim about something, typically a product or service, while having no basis for believing this claim to be true). 

Finally, we’ll take a brief look at **government liability** in tort law.

!!! note "Readings"

    - Philip H Osborne, The Law of Torts, 6th ed. (Toronto: Irwin Law, 2020), **pp 146-153; 169-175; 181-214; 223-234.**
    - ***Hollis v. Dow Corning Corp.***, [1995 CanLII 55 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1frdr){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Hedley Byrne & Co. Ltd. v Heller & Partners Ltd.*** [1964] A.C. 465 (H.L.) 

## Topic 1: Products Liability

Please read: ***Hollis v. Dow Corning Corp.***, [1995 CanLII 55 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1frdr){:target=" \_blank"}

When we talk of the duties of manufacturers, we are dealing with the area of law known as **products liability**. **Manufacturers** and **suppliers** have several duties to the ultimate consumer or user of their products. One of these duties is the duty to **warn consumers about dangers** associated with the normal use or misuse of their products, of which the manufacturer knows or ought to know. Recall the McDonald’s coffee case we touched on in the first Module. In that case, there were warnings on the coffee cup indicating that the contents were hot (*albeit* in faint yellow type), but the jury found them to be insufficient.

**Manufacturing Defects**

The text gives a good historical overview of manufacturers’ duty of care to warn about manufacturing defects. It all began with ***Donoghue*** and Lord Atkin’s outline of the duty, which we looked at extensively in Module 4. That initial formulation, in relation to manufacturers duty of care, has been very much broadened. The duty of care extends beyond manufacturing products to include parts and assemblers (including building contractors). 

The text touches on the costs that may be spread on to consumers, ... However, **the benefits of a stricter liability scheme generally outweigh the costs**. In particular, large corporations **(a)** are able to absorb the cost and compensate plaintiffs for their damage and, **(b)** will want to avoid negative publicity and want to address the problem as quickly as possible.

**The duty to warn**

The duty of manufacturers to warn is clear-cut. ***Lambert v. Lastoplex Chemicals***, [1971 CanLII 27 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1twsz){:target=" \_blank"} is referenced in the text and is the **leading case on manufacturers’ duty to warn consumers** (p 148, note 7). The important points to pull from ***Lambert*** are:

- A manufacturer incurs liability for harms arising from the **ordinary use** of its product;
- Warnings on particularly dangerous products must be **reasonably detailed and designed for the general public**;
- A plaintiff's **particular professional background or particular expertise does not absolve** the manufacturers for liability arising from ordinary use of dangerous products and insufficient product warnings.

A recent set of cases on the duty to warn involves cigarettes. ... courts hold that manufacturers are the ones primarily responsible for their products.

What we are looking at then in this section of the Module is **whether** manufacturers and suppliers can **pass their duty to warn on** to a third party, known as an **intermediary**, or **whether** they can be **absolved of liability** because another party has conducted an intermediate inspection of the product.

**Warnings and the learned intermediary**

The cases in this area involve **manufacturers of pharmaceuticals and medical devices**. In addition to the main duty-to-warn rule, which the text covers at pp 148-150, there are a few other points to keep in mind:

- The duty to warn is a **continuing duty** (even after distribution of the product).
- The type of warning required **varies with the danger** (the greater the danger, the more explicit must be the warning)
- Medical products, particularly those designed for ingestion or implantation, require the **highest level of warning**
- Where the product is not handled directly by the consumer but by an expert third party, a “learned intermediary,” the manufacturer can **discharge the duty to warn by advising the third party**, as opposed to the consumer, of the risks or dangers associated with that product, and expecting that intermediary to make the end user aware of them (this is known as the **learned intermediary rule**).

The leading case on this topic in Canada is ***Hollis v Dow Corning Corp***, a 1995 Supreme Court of Canada decision that is one of our required readings and referenced in the text (p 151, note 11). ... the sole issue that worked its way to the Supreme Court, which was whether Dow could be liable for a failure to warn, given that there was **a learned intermediary** (Dr. Birch) in this case.

The case makes it clear that, to discharge its duty to warn, the manufacturer must **fully inform the learned intermediary**. Otherwise, the manufacture has not passed on the duty, and is liable for the results if an under-informed patient uses the product.

The second issue in this case was the causation issue. The text summarizes the Court’s conclusion on causation at pp 151-152. The Court found that **a subjective test of causation** applied to manufacturers. Here, the question was **whether this plaintiff would have undergone the breast implant procedure had she known the risk, not what a reasonable person in her shoes would have done**. The courts concluded that she would not have done so.

We can state the “**learned intermediary rule**” this way:

!!! info ""

    A manufacturer has **no duty** to directly warn consumer if:

    - the product is **highly technical** in nature and is intended to be **used only under the supervision of experts**; or
    - the nature of the product is such that the **consumer will not realistically receive a direct warning** from the manufacturer before using the product

**A note on intermediate inspection**

The other special **defence** that manufacturers attempt to raise in a tort claim, including claims for negligent manufacture, is that they are not liable because **an intermediate party**, whether inspector, installer, supplier, repairer or distributor, **intervened and therefore the duty shifted to that party** to warn the consumer instead. The rationale behind this concept is that **the intermediate party “broke the chain of causation”** between the manufacturer and consumer. (This concept of a chain of causation foreshadows our consideration of the fourth element of negligence, later this term.)

This argument has a good foundation in ***Donoghue v Stevenson***, if you recall Lord Atkin’s remarks about the impossibility of “intermediate examination.” (see p 146, note 3). It has not, however, found favour with most Canadian courts. **In Canada, manufacturers have not been relieved of their duty to warn.**

## Topic 2: Occupiers' Liability

Occupiers’ liability is the broader concept of the **care owed to those who enter onto that land**.

The rules were originally rooted in general principles derived from ***Donoghue*** and for many years developed as an outgrowth of traditional English attitudes towards land ownership on the one hand and the need to protect persons treading onto that land. In a nutshell, it’s a compartmentalized area of tort law based on a **relationship determined by proximity between the occupier of the land and the visitor**. This approach had many problems but chief among them was a growing realization that the historical common law scheme favoured land owners’ interests over the welfare of visitors onto that land.

The text outlines **two approaches to reforming** occupiers’ liability tort law. 

The **first**, which is covered at pp 171-172, involved an evolution of the common law to reflect more **modern concerns over the welfare of individuals over landowners’ interests**. Essentially tort law evolved to incorporate more reasonable principles of care owed towards visitors onto land. This approach is used in a minority of provinces in Canada: Saskatchewan and Newfoundland and Labrador. 

The key legal principle to know there is that the Supreme Court of Canada, in ***Veinot v. Kerr-Addison Mines Ltd.***, [1974 CanLII 20 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1twzf){:target=" \_blank"}, has essentially done away with the old tort concepts of occupiers’ liability where illegal visitors onto land were owed little protections. The Court in ***Veinot*** applied the principle of “**common humanity**” (p 172) where an occupier who is aware of the presence of a trespasser **must act with a minimal standard of care**, which is dependent on the particular circumstances of the intrusion onto land. **With respect to lawful visitors**, the standard of care was clarified in 1999 by the Newfoundland Court of Appeal in ***Stacey v. Anglican Churches of Canada***, [1999 CanLII 18933 (NL CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/27pr5){:target=" \_blank"} which **outlined a standard of care** which takes into account the context of the presence onto land and is meant to ensure reasonable safety for licensees.

This section of the Module will focus on the **second** approach: **legislative schemes** adopted in most other Canadian provinces, focusing on British Columbia.

**Developing a statutory scheme for occupiers' liability**

Apart from New Brunswick, all other Canadian provinces other than the two mentioned above have adopted statutory schemes to deal with occupiers’ liability. The fact that tort law has been supplanted by provincial occupiers’ liability acts does not mean that all the provisions are identical, but they do share the **common purpose** of aiming to **protecting visitors onto property** (pp 173-176).

The section on occupiers liability in the **1965 Proceedings of the Commissioners’ Meeting** complements the historical discussion in the text and make for interesting reading. In particular pp 94-99 of the Report outline the **rationale** for introducing **new occupiers’ liability legislation**.

Some key issues and concerns that are expressed in the report:

- The status of a visitor onto property determined an **occupiers’ duty of care**;
- A business relationship between the parties usually resulted in the visitor being classified as an “**invitee**” whereas a social relationship resulted in a “**licensee**” classification;
- The Canadian reforms of occupiers’ liability were to be based on statutory reforms enacted in England and Scotland in the 1950s;
- The **distinction between invitees and licensees should be abolished** so that every visitor was owed some duty of care;
- Whether an occupier’s warning to a fully appreciative invitee **nullifies any duty** of care (here there was some question over which direction Canadian courts would then follow， obviously prior to the ***Veinot*** decision mentioned above);
- There was concern over occupiers’ use of contractors as intermediaries to nullify application of the rule. The occupiers’ **use of contracts to opt out of obligations** was however generally accepted;
- Liability could be **exempted by notice**;
- There was a need for some “**common duty of care**” provided that the legislation provided for different treatment in different circumstances (e.g. trespassers);
- A general duty of care to contractual visitors would depend upon **express provisions of the contract**;
- There should be **special statutory rules** relating to duty of care and children;

In summary, as you can probably guess there was a definite desire to **move away from the distinctions of invitee/licensee** in favour of **a general statutory duty of care**.  This statutory duty would incorporate negligence principles but acknowledge the government need and social policy rationale behind balancing the protection of visitors onto property with occupiers’ rights.

**British Columbia Occupiers Liability Act**

The *Occupiers Liability Act*, [[RSBC 1996] c 337](https://www.bclaws.gov.bc.ca/civix/document/id/complete/statreg/96337_01){:target=" \_blank"}, ultimately enacted into law in 1974, was the result of these discussions to modernize occupiers’ liability law. 

As Osborne notes, provincial occupiers’ liability acts are mostly similar but do contain **some differences** that require separate analysis (p 173, note 75). For example, the *Alberta Occupiers Liability Act*, RSA 2000, c O-4, did not establish a general duty of care in relation to all entrants to property. Section 7 of the Alberta Act states that “An occupier is not under an obligation to discharge the common duty of care to a visitor in respect of risks willingly accepted by the visitor.”

The B.C. *Occupiers Liability Act*, in Section 3, replaces the common law distinctions with **a general standard of reasonable care** but contains exemptions that are similar to, but not identical to, the Alberta legislation:

!!! info ""

    **Occupiers’ duty of care**

    **Section 3**

    (1) An occupier of premises owes **a duty to take that care** that in all the circumstances of the case is **reasonable** to see that a person, and the person's property, on the premises, and property on the premises of a person, whether or not that person personally enters on the premises, will be reasonably safe in using the premises.

    (3) Despite subsection (1), an occupier has no duty of care to a person in respect of risks **willingly assumed** by that person **other than a duty not to**

    - (a) **create a danger** with intent to do harm to the person or damage to the person's property, or
    - (b) **act with reckless disregard** to the safety of the person or the integrity of the person's property.

The B.C. *Act*’s general language, though, in effect imposes at least **the same standard of care found in negligence law**. Section 3 of the B.C. *Act* does otherwise increase level of care owed to trespassers and licensees. **Tresp assers** are dealt with specifically in the *Act*:

!!! info ""

    **(3.1)** A person who is trespassing on premises while committing, or with the intention of committing, a criminal act is deemed to have willingly assumed all risks and the occupier of those premises is subject only to the duty of care set out in subsection (3). 
    
    **(3.2)** A person who enters any of the categories of premises described in subsection (3.3) is deemed to have willingly assumed all risks and the occupier of those premises is subject only to the duty of care set out in subsection (3) if 
    
    - (a) the person who enters is trespassing, or...

In 1998 the B.C. government amended the Act, including incorporating the language to **ss 3(3)(a)(b)** highlighted above, to **limit occupiers’ duty of care to uninvited visitors** entering “rural premises” and using their land. The **policy intention** behind this may have been to create freer access to roads for cyclists by limiting occupiers’ liability for any injuries that could occur on their property. However, it also had the effect of reinstating the common law restrictions on liability for certain negligent conduct.

The purpose of the 1998 amendments were clearly articulated by the B.C. Supreme Court in ***Hindley v. Waterfront Properties Corp.***, [2002 BCSC 885](https://canlii.ca/t/5kfz){:target=" \_blank"}. At para 19 the Court stated:

> [19] The **diminished duty of care for recreational use** of rural premises is a result of a 1998 Amendment to the *Occupiers Liability Act*.  The purpose of the Amendment is clear - it is to encourage landowners in rural areas to allow the public to use their land for recreational purposes.  The legislation recognizes that the normal duty of care set out in the *Occupiers Liability Act* might be onerous in a rural setting, where owners may have limited practical ability to control access to their land, and where the cost of continuous monitoring of land to ensure that it is reasonably safe for all comers may be high.

Some principles, such as contributory negligence as a defence, appear in all the provincial occupiers’ liability acts. Similarly they all contain language that **allows modification or exclusion of statutory duty through agreement**. Section 4 of the B.C. *Act* provides for contracting out with exceptions to protect the interests of those who are not privy to the agreement.

The key points of the remainder of the *Act* that you need to know are:

- liability does not extend negligent independent contractors provided that the occupier exercised **reasonable care in selecting and supervising them** (**Section 5**);
- a landlord’s immunity from liability for a tenant’s visitor (immunity under the common law) is removed in relation to landlords who do not exercise their **duty to repair and maintain leased premises** - provided of course that the tenant’s visitor’s injuries were caused by the landlord’s failure to repair according to the terms of a lease. (**Section 6**)
- **Section 8** of the *Act* binds the provincial government to its provisions but makes **exceptions for public highways, certain public and private roads**.

Despite some of the concerns above that can be gleaned from ***Hindley***, the *Act*, as Osborne notes, is generally viewed a vast improvement over the old common law provisions relating to occupiers’ liability.

## Topic 3: Pure Economic Loss

Please read: ***Hedley Byrne & Co. Ltd. v Heller & Partners Ltd.*** [1964] A.C. 465 (H.L.)

As the text notes (p 181) the word “**pure**” is used to specify the tort **where a plaintiff’s only loss is economic or financial**. It is distinct from other torts where loss of income or loss of profits were consequential of other damage to person, chattel, etc. The **leading case** for pure economic loss is the 1964 U.K. House of Lords decision in ***Hedley Byrne & Co. Ltd. v Heller & Partners Ltd*** which began the continuing process of slowly expanding negligence law into purely economic losses (*ibid*., note 85).

An example of a pure economic loss tort would be **loss of market value** of a property owing to the inadequate municipal inspection of the foundation of a house (***Armstrong v. West Vancouver (District of)***, [2003 BCCA 73](https://canlii.ca/t/5dfp){:target=" \_blank"}). More often claims for pure economic loss do succeed because of a lack of proximity between the negligent act and the damage to ground liability (***D'Amato v. Badger***, [1996 CanLII 166 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fr75){:target=" \_blank"}). 

Indeed, Canadian courts continue to view pure economic loss claims extremely warily. There are several good reasons for this:

- A broad recognition of liability for pure economic losses would **result in a flood of litigation**, no longer confined to the relatively narrow victims of negligent conduct;
- Interests in persons or property have historically been more valued that pure economic interests (although arguably this is changing and may be influencing changes in law as well);
- Purely economic losses **normally fall into the ambit of contract law**;
- The concept of a **free market** could well include the ability to inflict economic losses on market competitors.

**The concept of pure economic loss**

The concept of pure economic loss is potentially vast and mostly beyond the scope of this course. For our purposes, it's enough for you to know the development of pure economic losses within tort law and some of its application in Canada. The text has a good discussion of ***Hedley*** (pp 181-184). In terms of its application in Canada, we will focus just on its slow adoption **here** and **its application in negligent misrepresentation cases**.

Canadian courts’ struggle to **limit** potentially broad liability under pure economic losses was evident in ***Canadian National Railway Co. v. Norsk Pacific Steamship Co.***, [1992 CanLII 105 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fsb2){:target=" \_blank"}. There, **McLachlin J.** (as she was then) writing as part of the majority, said in para 258:

> In summary, it is my view that the authorities suggest that pure economic loss is *prima facie* recoverable where, in addition to negligence and foreseeable loss, there is **sufficient proximity** between the negligent act and the loss. Proximity is the controlling concept which avoids the spectre of unlimited liability.

Proximity was initially seen as the limiting factor in potentially unlimited liability but this was not a view shared unanimously by the Justices in ***Norsk***. 

**Contractual relational economic loss** thus was **developed** further in ***Bow Valley Husky (Bermuda) Ltd. v. Saint John Shipbuilding Ltd.***, [1997 CanLII 307 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fqwf){:target=" \_blank"}. The text covers the somewhat muddled situation during this period (p 205). The Supreme Court of Canada then tried to **clarify the situation more** in ***Hercules Managements Ltd. v. Ernst & Young***, [1997 CanLII 345 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fr23){:target=" \_blank"}, when the court imposed limitations on negligent corporate auditors (p 185, note 93). In ***Hercules***, the court did not find the auditors liable for liability on the auditors for concerns relating to overly broad liability. The key policy consideration relating to liability and pure economic loss was articulated by the court at para 31:

> the fundamental policy consideration that must be addressed in **negligent misrepresentation** actions centres around the possibility that the defendant might be exposed to “**liability in an indeterminate amount for an indeterminate time to an indeterminate class**”.

From these examples the current scope of liability for pure economic losses in negligence law has been so far limited in several ways. 

**A note on governmental liability**

It’s not required for you to read the chapter on governmental liability. I do want to however cover another topic relatively briefly that deals with proximity, negligent misrepresentation and touches on government liability, ***R. v. Imperial Tobacco Canada Ltd.***, [2011 SCC 42](https://canlii.ca/t/fmhcz){:target=" \_blank"}, as it’s a relatively recent Supreme Court of Canada decision (p 195, note 119). 

Imperial Tobacco was seeking to “third party” the federal government into those lawsuits, claiming that it was negligent for failing to warn consumers and industry that low-tar cigarettes were not in fact safer for smokers, and indeed for making statements suggesting that such cigarettes were safer. What is useful for our purposes is the way the Supreme Court approaches the **duties of the federal government to the public and to the tobacco companies**.

The Court at paras 40-60 talks about **two main bases** for **proximity** between the government (including various governmental agencies) and a plaintiff. 

One basis is for **the duty of care to be found in legislation**, whether explicitly or implicitly (at para 43). This notion should be familiar to you from ***Cooper***, in which the legislative scheme was the main thing the Supreme Court of Canada looked at. 

The second, at para 45, is:

> a series of specific **interactions** between the government and the claimant. [Here,] the government has, through its conduct, entered into a special relationship with the plaintiff **sufficient to establish the necessary proximity for a duty of care**.

The Court notes that legislation is relevant to the second basis, since a conflict between a duty in tort and the state’s statutory duties might negate proximity. It also notes that in some cases **both bases, statute and relationship, may support a duty**.

For the case at bar, the legislative framework was also general, failing to satisfy that basis of proximity, but there were extensive “interactions between Canada and the tobacco companies..."

On that basis, the SCC found that Canada had a *prima facie* duty of care to the companies in relation to the lawsuit by British Columbia, but not in relation to the class action suit. However, Canada convinced the Court that **it should negate the duty based on policy considerations** and governmental liability specifically relating to the government’s policy to encourage smokers to switch to low-tar cigarettes. 

## Topic 4: Governmental Liability

The **historical government immunity** (rooted in common law) from liability in torts was **ended** partially through common law evolution beginning in the 17th century that gradually established the rights of English subjects to sue the crown. 

However numerous practical obstacles to bringing court actions against the Crown remained for many years. In Canada, Crown immunity was finally **ended** primarily through the enactment of **federal and provincial statutes** that establish and circumscribe Crown liability in torts:

**Federal**: *Crown Liability and Proceedings Act*, [R.S.C. 1985, c 50](https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/c-50/){:target=" \_blank"}.

**Provincial (B.C.)**: *Crown Proceeding Act*, [RSBC 1996, c 89](https://www.bclaws.gov.bc.ca/civix/document/id/complete/statreg/96089_01){:target=" \_blank"}.

The extent of **governmental liability** varies depending on the context and facts of any given situation but is always **governed by the applicable statute**. 

All the statutes also contain requirements for notice of any **claim** against the crown be given **within a specified time period** after the cause of action arose. Any claim against the federal government or a provincial government should be examined specifically against the applicable statute as soon as possible to avoid a situation where a claim cannot be filed due to the notice time period expiration.

**Misfeasance in public office**

Liability for the unlawful actions of dishonest public officials centres on the tort of **misfeasance in public office**. 

Historically the tort applied only in the context of unlawfully exercising a statutory power for certain purposes (e.g. harming a plaintiff, enriching friends, etc.) and with actual knowledge that his conduct and lack of statutory power would actually harm a plaintiff. 

The 2003 Supreme Court of Canada decision in ***Odhavji Estate v. Woodhouse***, [2003 SCC 69](https://canlii.ca/t/1g18n){:target=" \_blank"} is the leading authority in Canada and it **broadened the application of the tort**. The Court defined the **scope and purpose of misfeasance** in public office in para 30 of the decision:

> In sum, I believe that the underlying **purpose** of the tort is to **protect each citizen’s reasonable expectation** that a public officer will not intentionally injure a member of the public through deliberate and unlawful conduct in the exercise of public functions.
> 
> Once these requirements have been satisfied, it is unclear why the tort would be **restricted to** a public officer who engaged in the unlawful exercise of a statutory power that she or he **actually possesses**.  If the tort were restricted in this manner, the tort would not extend to a public officer, such as Mr. Duplessis, who intentionally exceeded his powers for the express purpose of interfering with a citizen’s economic interests.  Nor would it extend to a public officer who breached a statutory obligation for the same purpose.
> 
> But there is no principled reason, in my view, why a public officer who wilfully injures a member of the public through **intentional abuse of a statutory power** would be liable, but not a public officer who wilfully injures a member of the public through an **intentional excess of power or a deliberate failure to discharge a statutory duty**.  In each instance, the alleged misconduct is equally inconsistent with the obligation of a public officer not to intentionally injure a member of the public through deliberate and unlawful conduct in the exercise of public functions.

Although this broadened the tort of misfeasance in public office to include broad-based unlawful conduct in exercising public functions **it still requires actual knowledge of wrongdoing on the part of the public officer**. In other words, decisions made honestly without knowledge that the action is outside the authority of the office don’t attract liability under the tort. This was designed so that public officials would not feel unduly restricted in good faith decision-making.

**Negligence and Crown liability relating to statutory powers**

The Supreme Court of Canada clarified in ***Welbridge Holdings Ltd. v. Greater Winnipeg***, [1970 CanLII 1 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1nfmc){:target=" \_blank"} that **legislative functions of government** do not give rise to a duty of care to private citizens (p 225, note 186). Similarly, **judicial officials performing their functions**, in the absence of fraud or bad faith, are not liable in Canada to negligence actions (*ibid*., note 188). These **immunities** are necessary to protect the integrity and functioning of both government and the judicial process.

Within the context of governmental liability, the U.K. House of Lords decision in ***Anns*** was modified by ***Cooper*** to provide a **Canadian solution** to when the Crown owes a private citizen a duty of care. 

Essentially government performance of functions may owe a duty of care to a private citizen within the context of policies that involve many social and political considerations. What this means basically is that the courts, in Canada, have emphasized that **the primary method of dealing with the majority of government decisions that are viewed negatively is through democratic elections, not litigation**. Government liability is maintained when it exercising its operational functions **in bad-faith** or for **a complete failure to even consider exercising its statutory power**. 

In general, however, **policy decisions**, even the worst ones, **can’t be challenged** in Canadian courts.

The line between bad policy and negligent actions can be **murky**. The text compares three Supreme Court of Canada decisions in 1980, 1989, and 1994, each dealing injuries or fatalities related to dangerous highway conditions and alleged government inaction, to illustrate the difficulties in drawing the line between questionable (some might say stupid) policy decisions and clearly negligent actions (pp 227-229).

In summary, the cases provided a very general framework for governmental liability but there still seems to be a lack of a consistent approach. The text then goes on to cover the ***Cooper*** analysis but the material we reviewed with respect to duty of care in Module 4 is sufficient for our purposes here. One of the key facts to retain post-***Cooper*** with respect to governmental liability is that** a duty of care still exists for governments** in the various areas, including (p 231):

- **inspection** of buildings and road **maintenance**;
- duty of care on the part of police to criminal suspects and to families of deceased victims of **police shootings** in the context of an investigation;
- duty to a plaintiff on the part of provincial officials to **implement favourable judicial orders**;
- duty on **mine inspectors** to exercise care for miners’ safety

Apart from the expansion into these and other areas, governmental liability remains circumscribed. It’s unclear if and when there will be further significant expansions for governmental liability. **Canadian courts seem unlikely to greatly expand governmental liability into areas that are more justly dealt with through policy adjustments.** The emphasis in Canada may have shifted more towards **governmental accountability through legislative oversight and, ultimately, the ballot-box**.

## Summary

In this Module, we reviewed **topics** that are linked to negligence law, but in most ways are **treated separately**. The overarching theme here is how these special topics in negligence law are tied into changing societal and governmental goals. 

In the area of consumer products and products liability, for example, law has changed to **better protect the consumer**. 

In terms of occupiers’ liability law has evolved from mainly protecting landowners’ interests to **better protect the interests of visitors** onto property while holding businesses responsible for maintaining safe access to visitors. 

We see the same evolution of law in terms of economic loss, law has changed to incorporate pure economic losses in line with the prevalent market economy that **views losses of financial interests on the same page as injuries to person and chattels**. 

In the same way governments have not been immune to the changing social and political environment. Law has changed to **greater hold governments’ accountable**. 

## Textbook Summary: pp 146-153; 169-175; 181-214; 223-234

**Chapter 3 SPECIAL TOPICS IN NEGLIGENCE**

**B. PRODUCTS LIABILITY**

Initial duty to take reasonable care to manufacture products that are free of dangerous defects, recognized in ***Donoghue v Stevenson***, [1932 CanLII 536 (FOREP)](https://canlii.ca/t/gghx0){:target=" \_blank"}, has been complemented by **a duty to warn of the inherent dangers of products** and **a duty to design products with reasonable care**. 

Strict liability is the norm for manufacturing defect cases **but**, **in cases of design flaws and a failure to warn, fault is often required.** 

(1) Manufacturing Defects

The modern law of products liability began with a defective bottle of ginger beer and the case of ***Donoghue v Stevenson***. It is to take **reasonable care** that their products are **manufactured in compliance** with their intended specifications and design and that they are **not dangerously defective**.

Today, the failure of a third party, such as a retailer, to discover a defect by reasonable inspection is unlikely to exonerate the defendant. It is more likely that the **manufacturer and the third party will be held jointly and severally liable**. A failure by the plaintiff to inspect the product suggests contributory negligence, which was a complete defence when ***Donoghue*** was decided. Now **damages may be reduced on account of the plaintiff’s fault** but the defendant will not be exonerated from all liability.

The duty of care currently **extends beyond the manufacturers of products**. It rests on the makers of component parts, assemblers, installers, repairers, and building contractors.

(2) The Duty to Warn

Manufacturers are also under a duty to warn consumers of dangers inherent in the use of their products. The **leading decision** on the duty to warn is that of the Supreme Court in ***Lambert v. Lastoplex Chemicals***, [1971 CanLII 27 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1twsz){:target=" \_blank"}.

The product was not defective. Nevertheless, the Supreme Court found the defendant **manufacturer liable** because the warnings provided were insufficient to allow the product to be used safely. It held that **a duty to warn arises** where

- the product is placed on the market for use by the **general public**
- the product is **dangerous** when used for its intended purpose 
- the manufacturer **knows or ought to know of the danger**, and
- the public does not have the **same awareness** of the danger as the manufacturer.

The applicable standard of care is to **take reasonable steps** to provide warnings that permit the product to be used safely. The nature and extent of the warning required **depends upon all the surrounding circumstances**. 

**Compliance with statutory rules and regulations** pertaining to the safety of products may **not be sufficient** to discharge the common law duty to warn. 

(a) Medical Products and the Learned Intermediary Rule

The ***Lambert*** principle is equally applicable to the manufacturers of medical products. These products are normally provided to health-care professionals, and there is **no practical way** for the manufacturer to inform the individual patient.

The Supreme Court had an opportunity to address this issue in ***Hollis v. Dow Corning Corp.***, [1995 CanLII 55 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1frdr){:target=" \_blank"}. The Court recognized the **obstacles** to direct communication between the manufacturer and the patient and the **primary reliance** of the patient on her physician and held that it was **sufficient for the manufacturer to provide the requisite information to a learned intermediary** (normally the attending physician) who is then in a position to pass it on to the patient. The Court stated that disclosure could be made to a learned intermediary where a product is **highly technical** in nature and is intended to be **used only under the supervision of experts** (for example, breast implants, artificial joints, and pacemakers) or where the nature of the product is such that the consumer will **not realistically receive a direct warning** from the manufacturer before using the product (for example, prescription drugs).

The Court also addressed two further issues arising in the ***Hollis*** case. Both related to aspects of the **proof of causation**. 

- The first dealt with establishing that the plaintiff would have declined to have had the breast implant surgery if she had been told of the material risk of rupture. The contentious issue was the choice between the **modified objective test**, which would ask what a reasonable person in the plaintiff’s position would have done if she had known of the risks, and a **subjective test** which would ask what the individual plaintiff would have done. A majority of the Court chose a subjective test and concluded that the plaintiff would not have had the implant surgery if she had been given appropriate warnings.
- The second issue dealt with the lack of evidence in ***Hollis*** that the learned intermediary, the plaintiff’s attending surgeon, would have passed on information about the risks of the implant rupturing to the plaintiff if it had been provided to him by the defendant. ... the Court held that it was not necessary to delve into such a hypothetical question and the defendant **manufacturer could not exonerate** itself on the grounds that the physician might have been delinquent in his duty of disclosure.

The learned intermediary rule does not apply to all medical products. Sometimes the manufacturer can give information and warnings **directly** to the consumer. This is the case with over-the-counter medications and some prescription medications such as oral contraceptives. 

**E. OCCUPIERS’ LIABILITY**

Occupiers’ liability determines the care that is owed by those persons who control land (**occupiers**) **to visitors** who enter onto that land. The most common case is that of a visitor who slips and falls because of a dangerous defect on the premises. 

A brief description of the classical law will be useful in understanding the language and concepts used in this area of tort law and the current state of occupiers’ liability. 

(1) The Classical Common Law of Occupiers’ Liability

The classical common law doctrine of occupiers’ liability, ... This area of tort liability was **marked off from the law of negligence by two concepts**. 

- First, it **applied only to the occupier** of land. The concept of occupier included not only those who had exclusive possession of land, such as owners in possession and lessees, but also those who had control of the land. 
- Second, the rules of occupiers’ liability applied only to injuries arising from **static defects in the premises**. Liability for injuries caused by the occupier’s activities was controlled by the tort of negligence.

This approach called for the **classification of the injured visitor** as either a trespasser, a licensee, an invitee, or a contractual entrant, and for the application of the **correlative standard of care**. 

<!-- The occupier owed **no duty** to make the premises safe for a **trespasser**. The only duty was not to intentionally or recklessly injure a trespasser whom the occupier knew to be on the land. 

A **licensee** was defined as a visitor who had express or implied permission to be on the land. The occupier’s duty was to **prevent injury from hidden dangers** of which the occupier had actual knowledge. 

If the occupier not only gave permission to the visitor but also had some economic interest in her presence, the visitor was an **invitee**. The occupier was required to **take reasonable care** to prevent injuries caused by unusual dangers of which the occupier knew or ought to have known. 

The term **contractual entrant** referred to those visitors who entered into a contract, the primary purpose of which was to gain entry onto the land. It included, for example, those who paid to attend concerts and sporting events. In the absence of contractual terms to the contrary, the contract contained an **implied warranty that the premises were as safe as reasonable care and skill could make them**. -->

Modern Canadian tort law has **rejected almost all of these ideas**. The interest in **personal safety** is given much greater priority **than property interests**. This prompted two responses. 

- First, the common law, which is applied in Newfoundland and Labrador and Saskatchewan, gradually evolved towards **more general principles of reasonable care**. 
- Second, in the other provinces statutory intervention swept away the old common law and replaced it with either a **legislative regime of responsibility** or, in the case of New Brunswick, with negligence principles.

(2) The Modern Common Law of Occupiers’ Liability

The twentieth century witnessed the development of both covert and open judicial reform of the classical common law of occupiers’ liability. These measures have **ameliorated** some of the harsh **pro-defendant bias** of the classical doctrine.

The Supreme Court addressed this problem by adopting a more generous standard of care. An occupier who knows of the presence of a trespasser or knows that the presence of a trespasser is likely must act with **common humanity** to prevent injury from dangers of which he is aware.

(3) Legislative Reform

**Six provinces**, Alberta, British Columbia, Manitoba, Nova Scotia, Ontario, and Prince Edward Island, have opted for a fresh start in occupiers’ liability law by replacing the common law with **occupiers’ liability acts**. 

Only **New Brunswick** has taken the more radical step of abolishing a discrete occupiers’ liability tort, thereby permitting the **general principles of negligence** to apply.

The occupiers’ liability acts are not identical but the **central purpose** of each is to **replace the common law with a duty of reasonable care to almost all visitors**. 

The centrepiece of the *British Columbia Act* is section 3, which replaces the common law with **a general standard of reasonable care**. The occupier owes a duty of reasonable care to see that visitors, their property, and the unaccompanied property of visitors on the premises is reasonably safe. The *Act* also removes the static defect limitation of the common law, extending the occupier’s obligation of care to his activities on the premises and to the conduct of third parties on the premises.

The standard of care is applied **with reference to** the foreseeability of damage, the degree of risk of injury, the gravity of the threatened injury, the kind of premises, the burden of preventive measures, the practice of other occupiers, and the purpose of the visit.

A difficult issue in occupiers’ liability law is whether or not certain classes of visitors should be excluded from the protection of the general duty of care. The issue arises primarily in respect of **trespassers**. 

In British Columbia, the general **duty of care is not owed to trespassers with criminal intent** or to trespassers on certain agricultural and rural land. The only duty owed to them is not to injure them intentionally and not to act in reckless disregard for their safety.

In British Columbia, the same **low standard** is applied to some lawful entrants on certain agricultural and rural land for **recreational purposes** and to those visitors who have **willingly accepted risks** on the land. Most of the other Acts treat the **assumption of risk as a complete defence**. The **partial defence of contributory negligence** is available under all the Acts.

**Section 4** of the *British Columbia Act* allows occupiers to extend, restrict, modify, or exclude the statutory duty by **express agreement or notice**. There are several qualifications to this power.

**Section 5** of the *Act* clarifies the situation in British Columbia. The occupier is **not liable** for the negligence of **an independent contractor** provided that it was reasonable to have retained an independent contractor to do the work in question and **reasonable care was taken in the selection and supervision** of the independent contractor. This provision is common to the other Acts.

**Section 6** of the *Act* ... landlords who have a duty to **repair and maintain** the premises under the lease. The landlord, in those circumstances, is treated as an occupier in respect of all persons on the premises. It must, however, be shown that the plaintiff was injured by the landlord’s failure to repair under the terms of the lease.

**G. PURE ECONOMIC LOSS**

It was not until the case of ***Hedley Byrne & Co Ltd v Heller & Partners Ltd***, [[1964] AC 465 (HL)](https://www.uniset.ca/other/cs3/1964AC465.html){:target=" \_blank"}, however, that the courts began to extend the tort of negligence to provide a remedy for **pure economic loss**. 

The word **pure** is used to exclude those situations where the economic loss is consequential upon damage to the **person** or **property**. 

... economic loss cases can best be analyzed by grouping them into categories that give rise to **similar policy concerns and similar solutions**. These categories include **negligent misrepresentation**, **negligent performance of a service**, **relational economic loss**, and claims for **economic loss arising from the supply of poor quality goods and structures**.

**(1) Negligent Misrepresentation**

A **special relationship** that could be used on a case-by-case basis to identify the occasions on which **a duty of care may arise**. The factors in ***Hedley Byrne*** that supported a finding of a **special relationship** included the plaintiff’s request for the credit report, the expertise of the bank in such matters, the seriousness of the occasion on which the report was given, and the reasonable and foreseeable reliance of the plaintiff.

However, the Court concluded that the **disclaimer** was the most **compelling factor** and it concluded that the defendant owed no duty of care to the plaintiff.

The general principle in ***Hedley Byrne*** was immediately adopted by Canadian courts and most cases have been decided with reference to the notion of a special relationship. In due course it became apparent that the **most compelling factors** in deciding whether or not there was a special relationship were **the defendant’s voluntary assumption** of responsibility for the accuracy of her words and **the plaintiff’s foreseeable and reasonable reliance** on the information.

In ***Hercules Managements Ltd. v. Ernst & Young***, [1997 CanLII 345 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fr23){:target=" \_blank"}, the SCC de-emphasized the language of special relationship and the importance of an assumption of responsibility and stressed the **importance of the concept of foreseeable and reasonable reliance by the plaintiff**. As far as possible, the ***Anns*** test, should be used to determine if a duty of care is owed by the defendant to the plaintiff.

(a) Duty of Care (*Hercules*)

The Supreme Court in ***Hercules*** recognized that some modification of the ***Anns*** test was necessary to accommodate the special features of negligent misrepresentation cases. 

To establish the *prima facie* duty of care under the first branch of the ***Anns*** test, it is not sufficient to show that the defendant **might** reasonably foresee damage to the plaintiff. In negligent misrepresentation cases, the plaintiff must establish that the representor “**ought** reasonably to have foreseen that the plaintiff would rely on his representation and that reliance by the plaintiff, in the circumstances, would be reasonable.”

It is then necessary, under the second branch of the test, to determine if the *prima facie* duty creates sufficient concerns of indeterminate liability that it must be **negated** on the grounds of **public policy**.

**Foreseeable Reliance/Reasonable Reliance: The *Prima Facie* Duty of Care**

The foreseeable and reasonable reliance necessary to establish a *prima facie* duty of care is not a precise or certain concept. It is highly fact-sensitive and dependent on a number of factors. There are **a number of general indicia**, most of which were mentioned in ***Hercules***.

- **The Expertise and Knowledge of the Representor:** a duty of care most commonly arises where the defendant has some special expertise, knowledge, skill, information, or access to information that is not possessed by the ordinary person. It is both readily foreseeable and reasonable that ordinary persons and business entities will **rely on those with superior knowledge or special skills** in accessing and evaluating information. An imbalance of information between the defendant and the plaintiff is, therefore, a reliable indicator of a *prima facie* duty of care.
- **The Seriousness of the Occasion:** Reliance on information is foreseeable and reasonable when it is given on a business, professional, formal, or serious occasion.  An inquirer at a social event may put the defendant on guard by indicating the seriousness of the matter and her intention to rely on the advice. **In such circumstances, there is no duty to reply, but, if the defendant does, he is likely to be held to be under a duty of care.**
- **An Initial Request for Information:** It is probably more reasonable to rely on information that was, at least initially, given at the request of some person. This situation may, however, be contrasted with information that is volunteered to the public at large through modern systems of mass communication. In ***Premakumaran v. Canada (F.C.A.)***, [2006 FCA 213](https://canlii.ca/t/1nlbj){:target=" \_blank"}, for example, the Federal Court of Appeal held that the government did not owe a duty of care to prospective immigrants in respect of general informational brochures and documents prepared for their use.
- **Pecuniary Interest:** Any direct or indirect financial benefit received by the representor, or anticipated by the representor, increases the cachet of the information and encourages reliance on it. The pecuniary interest of the defendant is, therefore, an **influential factor** in establishing a duty of care. 
- **The Nature of the Statement:** There is some difference in opinion about the importance of the nature of the statement on which the plaintiff relied, namely, the **erroneous statements of fact**, and **statements of prediction, opinion, forecast, and advice**. The issue is better resolved by a determination of whether or not the reliance was, in the circumstances, foreseeable and reasonable.
- **Disclaimers:** As a general rule, a disclaimer of responsibility for the accuracy or reliability of the representation will **prevent the establishment of a duty of care**. Nevertheless, there may be **exceptional** circumstances where disclaimers will not be operative. 
    - First, insufficient notice may have been given of the disclaimer and the plaintiff may, reasonably, have acted in ignorance of it. 
    - Second, there is no judicial enthusiasm for disclaimers and it can be expected that courts will construe them severely against the defendant.
    - Third, it may, occasionally, be reasonable to rely on information in spite of a known disclaimer. The information may not, for example, be available from any other source and it may not be possible to verify the information. **A court may be sympathetic to the plaintiff when he had no choice but to rely on the information**. The decision of the British Columbia Court of Appeal in ***Micron Construction Ltd. v. Hong Kong Bank of Canada***, [2000 BCCA 141 (CanLII)](https://canlii.ca/t/5348){:target=" \_blank"} is illustrative.

Disclaimers may also be embodied in written contracts between the defendant and the plaintiff. 

As a general rule, a **contractual relationship between the parties does not negate tort liability for statements that are made before the contract** is entered into or during the performance of the contract. Tort and contract liability is **concurrent**, not mutually exclusive. The plaintiff generally, therefore, has a full and free choice to choose the most advantageous cause of action. 

Tort liability may not, however, subvert or contradict the terms of the contract, and if an exemption clause negates tort liability for a negligent misrepresentation, the contractual provision governs. At points of inconsistency and contradiction, the **contract “trumps” tort**.

**Policy Concerns: The Issue of Indeterminacy**

The *prima facie* duty of care may be negated where **a problem of indeterminacy** arises.

In ***Hercules***, the Supreme Court had no difficulty in finding a *prima facie* duty of care. There were, **however**, in the Court’s opinion, severe indeterminacy problems in the area of auditors’ liability. The Court held that factors of this kind are sufficient to negate the *prima facie* duty of care to **non-privity third parties** unless the factual matrix of the case is such as to **allay** the fears of indeterminacy. 

Two earlier Supreme Court decisions provide illustrations of situations where, under ***Hercules***, the *prima facie* duty of care to non-privity third parties **does not raise indeterminacy problems**. See ***Haig v. Bamford et al.***, [1976 CanLII 6 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1mx4w){:target=" \_blank"}, ***Edgeworth Construction Ltd. v. N. D. Lea & Associates Ltd.***, [1993 CanLII 67 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fs0p){:target=" \_blank"}.

(b) Duty of Care (*Deloitte*)

***Deloitte & Touche v. Livent Inc. (Receiver of)***, [2017 SCC 63](https://canlii.ca/t/hpdq9){:target=" \_blank"} dealt with the liability of auditors who failed to detect the fraudulent conduct of the directors of a corporation. 

The Supreme Court affirmed the lower court decisions and upheld the **finding of liability**. ... the Court took the opportunity to reframe the ***Hercules*** approach to better align it with the ***Anns/Cooper*** analysis. Under ***Deloitte***, the **initial step** is not reasonable foreseeability, there must **first** be a determination of whether or not **proximity exists between the parties**. The Court, in essence, conflated the two-step ***Hercules*** analysis within the concept of proximity and placed emphasis on the concept of voluntary assumption of responsibility.

(c) Standard of Care, Causation, and Contributory Negligence

The defendant is not a guarantor of the truth of the information he provides. The defendant is **obliged only to take reasonable care** to ensure that the information is accurate. The **appropriate standard of care** was discussed at some length by the Supreme Court in ***Queen v. Cognos Inc.***, [1993 CanLII 146 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fs5s){:target=" \_blank"}, which dealt with an employer’s misrepresentation about the nature and existence of an employment opportunity for which the plaintiff successfully applied. 

The Supreme Court ... affirming the traditional **standard of care of a reasonable person**. The defendant must “exercise such reasonable care as the circumstances require to ensure that representations made are accurate and not misleading.”

Courts have had no hesitation in imposing liability for **implied misrepresentations**. They are acutely aware of the possibility that statements which are technically accurate may, nevertheless, create a false impression.

There may also be special circumstances where there is **a duty to volunteer information** that is highly relevant to the plaintiff. It all depends on the relationship between the parties and the circumstances of the case. 

The concept of **reliance** plays a dual role in negligent misrepresentation cases. 

- In order to establish a duty of care under Hercules, it must be established that **reliance by the plaintiff is foreseeable and reasonable** in the particular circumstances of the case. 
- The second role relates to causation. It must be shown that the plaintiff did, **in fact, rely on the misrepresentation**.  After ***Hercules***, the issue has been narrowed to whether there was **actual reliance**.

A final point of some debate is the applicability of the defence of **contributory negligence** in negligent misrepresentation cases. The current emphasis on reasonable reliance suggests that the plaintiff has acted prudently and that the **defence will be difficult to establish**. 

In ***Avco Financial Services Realty Ltd. v. Norman***, [2003 CanLII 47436 (ON CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/7d1m){:target=" \_blank"}, the court held that if the claim of contributory negligence is based on the contention that the plaintiff acted unreasonably in relying on the misrepresentation it is **unsustainable** because **reasonable reliance is an essential element of the cause of action**. It recognized, nevertheless, that there may be situations where the circumstances surrounding the event that occasioned the **loss are different or wider** from those which surrounded the making of the misrepresentation. Contributory negligence will also be available where the plaintiff has **negligently exacerbated** his losses or **unreasonably failed to mitigate** them.

(d) Governmental Misrepresentations

There are many cases in which governments have been held liable for negligent misrepresentations. ... **policy factors** inapplicable to a private sector defendant may n**egate a governmental duty of care** on the grounds that the statement was one of governmental policy. ***R. v. Imperial Tobacco Canada Ltd.***, [2011 SCC 42](https://canlii.ca/t/fmhcz){:target=" \_blank"} is illustrative. 

**(2) Negligent Performance of a Service**

Pure economic loss may also be caused by the negligent failure to perform a service. In most situations, services are provided pursuant to a **contract** between the service supplier and the plaintiff. A failure to perform that obligation will give rise to an action for breach of contract. The nature of the loss presents **no obstacles to a contract action**. 

**Contract law**, however, provides **incomplete protection** in respect of the negligent performance of services in two situations. 

- First, contract law provides no remedy for economic loss caused by the negligent performance of **a gratuitous service**. If the service is free, there is no consideration, and an essential element of a contract is absent. 
- Second, the negligent performance of a contractual service may cause economic loss to a third person who stands to benefit directly or indirectly from the promised performance. The **rule of privity of contract** prevents the third party from suing on the contract.

It will be apparent that the problem with expanding the duty of care into this area is **less one of indeterminacy** and **more one of finding criteria to identify relationships** that, while not contractual, are sufficiently equivalent to contract to warrant the imposition of liability. 

The courts have, therefore, been influenced by the ideas of an **assumption of responsibility** by the service provider to the plaintiff and a **reasonable and justifiable reliance** by the plaintiff on the service provider. A relationship evidencing these characteristics is often **sufficient** to support a duty of reasonable care to avoid economic loss to the plaintiff in the performance of a service. 

(a) The Negligent Performance of a Gratuitous Service to the Plaintiff

The negligent performance of **a gratuitous service directly to the plaintiff** will often give rise to a duty of care. An assumption of responsibility and foreseeable reliance, coupled with proof of negligence and damage generated by the plaintiff’s reliance, is normally **sufficient** to impose liability.

An allied and more difficult issue arises where the defendant has promised to perform a gratuitous service but has **failed to carry it out at all**. Nevertheless, there would seem to be no significant difference between a person who, for example, gratuitously undertakes to secure insurance for another person and does it negligently and another who undertakes the same task and does not do it at all. An **assumption of responsibility** and **reasonable reliance** may also be found in the latter situation and **a duty may well be imposed**.

It can, however, be expected that, where there has been a failure to commence the performance of a gratuitous promise, **compelling evidence of assumption of responsibility and reliance will be required**. ***Maxey v. Canada Permanent Trust Company***, [1984 CanLII 2897 (MB CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/gbmkr){:target=" \_blank"} is illustrative.

(b) The Negligent Performance of a Contract of Service Causing Economic Loss to a Third Party

The rule of privity of contract has encouraged third-party beneficiaries to a contract to sue in tort when a negligent performance of a contract causes them economic loss. Again, the concepts of **assumption of responsibility** and **reasonable reliance** are influential in these cases. 

There is, however, in some cases the added **problem of indeterminacy**. The courts are, therefore, likely to take into account **additional factors** in deciding if the service provider owes a duty of care to the plaintiff third party. Consideration may be given to the size of the **pool** of potential plaintiffs, the **end and aim** of the contract, and whether or not it was **intended** that the plaintiff should benefit from the performance of the contract. 

The Supreme Court addressed this issue in ***B.D.C. Ltd. v. Hofstrand Farms Ltd.***, [1986 CanLII 51 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1ftvj){:target=" \_blank"}. The Court held that the defendant did **not owe a duty of care** to the plaintiff. The Court observed that the defendant had no knowledge of the contents of the envelope, no knowledge of the plaintiff, and no knowledge of the plaintiff’s contract. Consequently, there was no real basis for concluding that the defendant had assumed responsibility to the plaintiff, that the end and aim or intention of the contract was to benefit the plaintiff, or that the plaintiff had acted in reliance on the defendant. The Court concluded that there was **insufficient proximity** between the parties to support a duty of care.

(c) Negligent Misrepresentation and Negligent Performance of a Service

It is not always easy to **distinguish** between cases that are characterized as **negligent misrepresentation** cases and those that are characterized as **negligent performance of a service** cases. 

These cases indicate that any approach which uses categories to analyze cases will, inevitably, produce difficulties at the margins. Nevertheless, in the area of economic losses, the **advantages** of classification probably **outweigh** the **disadvantages** of the alternatives of either dealing with all economic cases on the basis of some elusive, all-encompassing general principle or approaching them as isolated single instances that are a law unto themselves.

**(3) Relational Economic Loss**

Relational economic loss occurs when the defendant negligently **damages the property or person of a third party** and, because of the relationship between that property or that person and the plaintiff, the **plaintiff suffers pure economic loss**. 

The loss is relational because the plaintiff is at least one step removed from the person who suffers the property damage, personal injury, or death. Relational economic loss ... are **not**, however, controlled by the **same legal principles**.

(a) Relational Economic Loss Arising from Property Damage 

Relational economic loss arising from property damage may be contractual or non-contractual. 

**Contractual relational economic loss** arises where the defendant has interfered with or damaged the property of a third person with whom the plaintiff has a contractual relationship. The property damage disrupts or interferes with the performance of the contract, causing the plaintiff to lose some economic advantage or benefits. 

**Non-contractual relational economic loss** arises where there is no contract between the property owner and the plaintiff but, nevertheless, damage to the property adversely affects the plaintiff’s business interests.

Claims for both contractual and non-contractual relational economic loss give rise to severe **indeterminacy problems**. There is general agreement that **strong controls must be placed** on recovery for relational economic loss arising from property damage.

(i) Contractual Relational Economic Loss

In the last few decades, there has been much debate about how the courts should deal with contractual relational economic loss. Broadly speaking, there have been two views. The first is to apply an exclusion- ary rule that disallows all contractual relational economic loss claims except those that fall into a few exceptional categories of cases where identifiable policy factors strongly support recovery. The other view is that contractual relational economic loss claims should be dealt with on a case-by-case basis and should be allowed where, on the facts, there are no insuperable indeterminacy problems. It is argued that economic loss is not qualitatively different from property damage, and there is no pressing reason to arbitrarily exclude all these claims from the oper- ation of the fault system and its compensatory and deterrent aspira- tions. All that is needed, on this view, is an adequate control device to keep liability within tolerable limits. This difference of approach was evident in the Supreme Court deci- sion in Canadian National Railway v Norsk Pacific Steamship Co.143 In that case, the defendant was the owner of a tug that negligently struck a rail- way bridge spanning the Fraser River. The bridge, which was owned by Public Works Canada, was closed for several weeks for repair. The plaintiff, Canadian National Railway, enjoyed a sophisticated contrac- tual licence to use the bridge for its rail traffic. The defendant knew that the bridge was used by CN, that it was essential to CN’s operation, and that CN was the main user of the bridge. CN sued for the cost of re-rout- ing its trains while the bridge was closed. The plaintiff succeeded in the Supreme Court but the Court did not speak with a single voice. With the exception of one judge, the Court was evenly split between the views of McLachlin J, as she then was, who wrote the leading judgment in favour of the plaintiff, and LaForest J, who wrote a powerful dissenting judgment. Justice Stevenson broke the tie in favour of the plaintiff but he adopted an approach with which no other judge agreed. Justice McLachlin took a flexible, fact-sensitive, case-by-case approach that relied on the two branches of the Anns test to contain




