---
layout: post
title: L503 Module 6
date: 2026-02-21
draft: false
categories:
  - Law
tags:
  - LAW_V 503E E_99C 2025W2 Tort Law - Tort Law
  - Module 6
---

# Defences

## Overview

A plaintiff may have successfully proved all elements of a negligence action, yet still be unsuccessful or only partially successful in their claim. The final topic in our study of Negligence law is that of **defences** to a negligence action. 

We will examine the **development** of defences available to a defendant as well as their **current application** in Canadian law.  

!!! note "Required Readings"

    - Philip H Osborne, *The Law of Torts*, 6th ed. (Toronto: Irwin Law, 2020), pp 112-123
    - ***Galaske v. O'Donnell***, [1994 CanLII 128 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1frvm){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Hall v. Hebert***, [1993 CanLII 141 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fs4g){:target=" \_blank"}
    - R Russo, "*Temporarily Unchained: The Drive to Unionize Foreign Seasonal Agricultural Workers in Canada: A Comment on Greenway Farms and UFCW*" BC Studies 169 (Spring 2011) [131-141](https://drive.google.com/file/d/18o-NiVq2o4bCeVUABh0OyiBl2Hfwfnqh/view?usp=sharing){:target=" \_blank"}

## Textbook Summary: pp 112-123

**G. DEFENCES** 

There are four defences to an action in negligence: **contributory negligence**, **voluntary assumption of risk** (*volenti non fit injuria*), **illegality** (*ex turpi causa non oritur actio*), and **inevitable accident**. 

Contributory negligence is a **partial defence** that leads to a reduction in the damages payable by the defendant. Voluntary assumption of risk, illegality, and inevitable accident are **complete defences** to the plaintiff’s action. 

The evolution of these defences mirrors the evolution of negligence from a system emphasizing the concept of **shifting loss** between individuals on the basis of clearly established moral culpability to one that is significantly influenced by the **loss-spreading** power of liability insurance systems and compensatory concerns. 

While contributory negligence continues to show some vitality, voluntary assumption of risk, illegality, and inevitable accident have been so successfully marginalized as to be of **little practical consequence**.

**(1) Contributory Negligence**

Contributory negligence is **the failure of the plaintiff to take reasonable care** for her own safety which contributes to the accident or her loss.

Apportionment of the loss between the parties was introduced in all provinces by legislation. The legislation is not uniform and each Act must be carefully analyzed to determine its scope and application and the extent to which remnants of the old common law doctrines such as **the rule of last clear chance**[^1] survive.

[^1]: the rule of last clear chance, which held that, in cases where the defendant had the last clear opportunity to avoid the accident, the defendant was the sole cause of the accident and fully responsible for the plaintiff’s losses. This provided the courts with some discretion to allocate 100 percent of the loss either to the plaintiff or to the defendant **as justice demanded**.

If the negligence of the plaintiff contributed to her loss, the court must determine the **degree** to which the plaintiff is responsible for that loss and reduce the damages accordingly. If a court is not able to determine the respective degrees of fault of the parties, they are **deemed to be equally at fault** and the defendant is liable for 50 percent of the damages.

Contributory negligence can **arise in three ways**.

- First, the plaintiff’s negligence may be **a cause of the accident**. 
- Second, contributory negligence may arise where the plaintiff’s negligence is not a cause of the accident but he has **put himself in a position of foreseeable harm** from the defendant’s negligence. 
- Third, a plaintiff may **fail to take protective measures** in the face of foreseeable danger such as a failure to use an available seat belt in an automobile or aircraft. If the plaintiff’s loss would have been less severe if the precautions had been taken, **damages will be reduced for contributory negligence**.

Contributory negligence is determined by applying **the objective standard of the reasonably prudent person**. Consideration is given to the same factors as are influential in deciding a defendant’s negligence. The **foreseeability** of harm, the **likelihood** of damage, the **seriousness** of the threatened damage, the **cost** of precautionary measures, the **exigencies** of emergency situations, and the **utility of the plaintiff’s conduct** are all taken into account. 

The **utility** of the plaintiff’s conduct is **particularly influential** in respect of police officers and rescuers where the task undertaken demands a selfless disregard for one’s own safety. Courts are reluctant to reduce damages in such cases.

... the assessment of contributory negligence is not made on the degree to which the conduct of each party caused the harm. It is made on the basis of the comparative **blameworthiness** of the conduct of the parties.

Overall, the apportionment process in cases of contributory negligence tends to be **conventional**, **arbitrary**, and **lenient**. It is conventional in the sense that in many cases courts either reduce damages by **20 to 30 percent** or they utilize the option of splitting the loss either because of **a rough equality of fault** between the parties or because it is not possible to allocate the respective degrees of fault of the parties.

**(2) Voluntary Assumption of Risk (*Volenti Non Fit Injuria*)** 

The defence of voluntary assumption of risk arises where a plaintiff has indicated that she **consented** (*volenti non fit injuria*) to the risk of harm generated by the defendant’s negligence. The current position is that the defence is **limited in scope and difficult to establish**.

The modern test of voluntary assumption of risk was developed by the Supreme Court in **a single genre of cases**. They dealt with **drunk drivers** whose negligence injured their **willing passengers**. It was the Court’s view that it was only in extreme circumstances that the plaintiff should be denied a remedy. Consequently, the modern test of voluntary assumption of risk was **formulated in narrow terms**.

The defendant must prove an **express** or **implied agreement** between the parties whereby the plaintiff has consented to accept **both the physical and the legal risk** of injury from the defendant’s negligence. In the **vast majority of cases**, however, **contributory negligence is the rule**.

The defence of voluntary assumption of risk does have greater viability in respect of express agreements to consent to the defendant’s negligence. The most common form of express consent is a **written waiver or release of liability**. 

The **validity** of these documents is controlled primarily by contract principles. 

- A waiver, for example, is normally **not enforceable unless** reasonable notice of its restrictive terms has been given to the plaintiff. 
- Any **misrepresentation** of the terms of that waiver may render it unenforceable. 
- A waiver that is *prima facie* enforceable is subject to the *contra proferentem* rule, which requires that the waiver be given the **narrowest possible interpretation** against the interests of the defendant. 
- A waiver may also be unenforceable if it is **unconscionable** or **contrary to public policy**. 
- The **rules of privity** of contract are also pertinent to waivers. A strict application of privity rules restricts the operation of the waiver to the contracting parties.[^2]

[^2]: The doctrine of privity of contract dictates that only **parties to a contract are bound** by its terms, can enforce them, or can sue for breaches. **Third parties** cannot incur obligations or claim benefits under a contract they did not sign, ensuring legal certainty but sometimes causing hardship in third-party beneficiary agreements.<br> Recent cases, however, point to **a relaxation of privity rules** and, in certain circumstances, the negligent employees of the contracting party may be protected by an appropriately worded waiver.

**(3) Illegality (*Ex Turpi Causa Non Oritur Actio*)**

*Ex turpi causa non oritur actio* is a long-established maxim of the common law. Loosely translated it means that no action may arise from a base cause. It embodies an intuitive reaction that **plaintiffs who are involved in illegal conduct and other serious wrongdoing when they suffer damage** should **not** be permitted to engage the legal system to pursue a **remedy**. 

The Supreme Court **restricted** the scope and application of the *ex turpi* maxim in ***Hall v. Hebert***, [1993 CanLII 141 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fs4g){:target=" \_blank"}. 

The primary issue was the applicability of the defence of illegality since the plaintiff’s conduct in driving while intoxicated was both negligent and illegal. The Court held that the defence can operate **only when the integrity of the legal system is threatened by allowing the claim**. 

This normally arises in only **two narrow situations**. A plaintiff is not permitted to use a tort action to **make a direct profit** from illegal conduct, and a tort action may not be used to **circumvent, subvert, or negate a criminal penalty**.

The ***Hall*** decision, for all practical purposes, makes the defence of illegality inapplicable to negligence actions. 

**(4) Inevitable Accident** 

It arises most often in cases of **automobile accidents caused by brake or other mechanical failure**. The defence of inevitable accident is, therefore, something of a legal curiosity, neither helpful nor particularly harmful. It merely emphasizes the centrality of fault and indicates that a defendant may try to rebut the plaintiff’s case by adducing evidence of his own showing that **reasonable care was taken and the accident was unavoidable**.

## Topic 1: Defences Overview

Even if a plaintiff can prove the five elements of negligence in any given case, it does not necessarily mean the plaintiff will recover damages, a.k.a. remedies, for the plaintiff’s losses. 

The defendant may have certain defences to the negligence claim. It is not necessary to put forward a defence, a defendant might be content with arguing that the plaintiff has not established **on a balance of probabilities** one or more of the essential elements of a negligence action (recall ***Snell*** and the “tactical burden of proof”). However, if any defence is arguable, it is prudent for the defence to raise it. It is up to the** defendant to prove any defence**. 

At common law, there were four defences to negligence:

- **Contributory negligence**: Plaintiff was also negligent and partly at fault for the loss
- **Voluntary assumption of risk:** Loss occurred while plaintiff was knowingly engaged in risky activity, and agreed to assume the risk of injury
- ***Ex turpi causa*, a.k.a. “illegality”:** Loss occurred while plaintiff was engaged in illegal activity (now a narrower defence than this definition implies)
- **Inevitable accident:** Loss was the result of accident beyond defendant's control. ... is not really a defence: it is a concept that overlaps with two of the other elements of the plaintiff’s claim.

The same fact situation may support more than one defence.

Although all of these are still valid defences, it is the first one, **contributory negligence**, that has become the **main defence** to negligence claims. 

## Topic 2: Contributory Negligence

Case Headnote Reading:  ***Galaske v. O'Donnell***, [1994 CanLII 128 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1frvm){:target=" \_blank"}

A reduction in liability depends on the defendant’s ability to prove that the plaintiff was contributorily negligent, i.e., the plaintiff also contributed to the loss. The defendant has to show that, **on the balance of probabilities**, the plaintiff failed to take reasonable care and that **this lack of care contributed to the plaintiff’s loss**.

**Conduct amounting to contributory negligence**

As you can see in the text at p 114, note 245, there are three main areas in which contributory negligence arises:

- plaintiff contributes to the accident which **caused** the loss
- plaintiff **exposes self** to a risk of being involved in an accident
- plaintiff **fails to take reasonable precautions** that will minimize injuries if an accident occurs (this is not the same as the duty to mitigate, it is about taking precautions in advance, e.g., by failing to wear a seatbelt or life jacket)

In any given case, a defendant may allege that the plaintiff was contributorily negligent in one or more of those three ways. The determination of whether the plaintiff was contributorily negligent is **a question of fact** for the trier of fact.

**Development of the Defence**

At common law, a plaintiff whose negligence contributed to the accident was **denied any recovery**. Contributory negligence was a complete defence because it was seen as **breaking the causal connection** between the defendant’s conduct and the plaintiff’s loss. 

An example of this is an 1809 English case that was before the King’s Bench, ***Butterfield v Forrester*** (1809), 103 ER 926. 

Lawyers argued that this “contributory negligence bar” was unfair to plaintiffs. The courts responded with the “**last clear chance**” rule, which allowed **a plaintiff to succeed** even if the plaintiff was contributorily negligent if the plaintiff could show that it was the **defendant who had the last clear chance to avoid the accident**. 

In other words, **whoever had the last clear chance (or last opportunity) to avoid the accident would be liable**. ***Davies v Mann*** (1842) 152 ER 588 was the case that introduced this rule. 

**Apportionment of loss: the rise of the %**

Due to its difficulty and to the inequity of all-or-nothing, the last clear chance rule was also sharply criticized. Its critics called for a scheme of “**apportioning the loss**”: not all-or-nothing, but requiring the defendant to pay a percentage of the loss, based on the degree to which the defendant was at fault, relative to the plaintiff.

In the early twentieth century, the common-law provinces passed legislation that gave courts the power to apportion liability between the defendant and plaintiff according to the degree to which each was at fault. **Contributory negligence was no longer a complete defence**. 

In B.C., this legislation is the *Negligence Act*, [RSBC 1996, c 333](https://www.bclaws.gov.bc.ca/civix/document/id/complete/statreg/96333_01){:target=" \_blank"}.

Section 1 says that liability is divided between plaintiff and defendant “**in proportion to the degree to which each person was at fault.**” The term “fault” refers to the standard of care. It is easy, however, to get mixed up and think of degree of causation.

This means it depends on a party’s “**blameworthiness**” and not that party’s “**causal contribution**.” The court determines each party’s relative degree of blameworthiness, not the degree to which the party’s negligence actually caused the loss. 

In ***Cempel v Harrison Hot Springs Hotel (1997)***, [1998] 6 WWR 233, 43 BCLR (3d) 219 (CA), the Court of Appeal held that **causation isn’t the same as fault**. 

**The seat belt defence**

In motor vehicle accidents, it is now well established that if the plaintiff was **not wearing a seatbelt**, the defendant can raise the argument that the plaintiff was **contributorily negligent**. 

The seat belt defence is different from most contributory negligence claims, since the impugned act (actually, an omission) of the plaintiff, **not wearing a seat belt, has not contributed in any way to the accident itself**. Rather, the act has contributed to the extent of the injuries suffered. Nonetheless, the courts have still accepted this failure to act as the **basis of a defence**. 

The same arguments can be made in respect of a plaintiff’s failure to use other pieces of safety equipment, such as a helmet. These are examples of a plaintiff being negligent for **failing to take precautions that would prevent or reduce harm**.

***Gagnon v. Beaulieu***, [1976 CanLII 1565 (BC SC)](https://canlii.ca/t/g96gk){:target=" \_blank"}, is one of the early contributory negligence cases in Canada based on a failure to wear a seat belt. It as it sets out the **two points the defendant has to prove** in order for contributory negligence to be factored in:

- the plaintiff was **not wearing** a seat belt, and
- the failure to wear a belt **contributed** to the plaintiff’s loss

Unusual circumstances relating to the seat belt defence arose in ***Galaske***, *supra*. The development of the **seat-belt defence**, is a potentially useful template in a range of other cases where **contributory negligence may be available as a defence**.

## Topic 3: Voluntary Assumption of Risk

Case Headnote Reading: ***Hall v. Hebert***, [1993 CanLII 141 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fs4g){:target=" \_blank"}

Voluntary assumption of risk is also known by its Latin term, *volenti non fit injuria*, which literally means “to a willing person, injury is not done.” (the text defines it as “**No injury can be done to a willing person.**”)

Voluntary assumption of risk is **an absolute defence**. If it is proved, the defendant is not liable: there is no apportionment, and the plaintiff receives no damages. 

The defendant has to prove two things:

- The plaintiff consented to the **physical risk** of the activity, and
- The plaintiff also consented to the **legal risk** of the activity, i.e., the plaintiff gave up the right to sue the defendant if harm occurred

**Waivers** have sometimes provided strong evidence that the plaintiff consented to both the physical and legal risks of the activity. However, the courts’ have decided the effect of waivers on a case-by-case basis without strong continuity. See ***Dyck v Manitoba Snowmobile Assn. Inc.*** [1985] 1 S.C.R. 589 and ***Crocker v Sundance Northwest Resorts Ltd.*** [1988] 1 S.C.R. 1186 for the Supreme Court of Canada’s consideration of waivers in different circumstances (p 120, Notes 262-263).

The defence is **rarely available in claims about motor vehicle accidents**, since it is all but impossible to prove that the plaintiff consented to the legal risk of the injuries. This was the finding in ***Hall v Hebert*** in which the trial court instead chose to find the passenger **contributorily negligent**.

In the final analysis an expressed agreement, through the use of a **signed waiver**, will generally much more easily aid in putting forth a defence of voluntary assumption of risk, if anything goes wrong with the activity. 

## Topic 4: Illegality (aka *ex turpi cause non oritur actio*)

*Ex turpi causa non oritur actio* is Latin for “from dishonourable conduct no action will lie” (the text translates it loosely as “no action may arise from a base cause.”) 

Traditionally, the *ex turpi* defence applied when the parties had both been participating in a criminal or immoral activity (some later cases restricted the defence to criminal acts only), and as a direct result of those acts the plaintiff was injured. Like *volenti*, the defence of *ex turpi* is an **absolute defence**: It absolves the defendant of all liability.

However, in the 1993 decision ***Hall v Hebert***, the Supreme Court of Canada reconsidered the defence, and all but abolished the doctrine. The majority, held that the doctrine should **only be invoked if its use is necessary to maintain the integrity of the legal system** (e.g., to maintain consistency between civil and criminal law). In other words, the defence would only apply if the plaintiff was trying to **profit from his illegal conduct**, or **escape from some criminal sanction**. The defence was disallowed, the plaintiff was, however, 25% **contributorily negligent**.

## Module 6 - Topic 4 - Practice Question

!!! danger "Quiz"

    1. TRUE/FALSE - The doctrine of *ex turpi causa* has been severely limited, but not completely eliminated, by the Supreme Court of Canada. (The doctrine of "*ex turpi causa*" translates into prohibiting profit from criminal activity.)
        - [x] True
        - [ ] False

## Topic 5: Inevitable Accident

As noted, this defense is now largely **unused**. 

In all of the three defences above, the defendant has to argue that the plaintiff’s behaviour has been such as to give the defendant a legal excuse, one that either **eliminates** liability (*volenti* and *ex turpi*) or that **reduces** it (contributory negligence). 

With the defence of inevitable accident, however, the defendant is claiming that the **harm would have happened anyway**.

To use the defence of inevitable accident, the defendant has to show that:

- something happened that the defendant **could not have prevented** by reasonable care, and
- reasonable care **could not have avoided the effect** of that event.

Defendants have raised inevitable accident in the context of motor **vehicle accidents** where mechanical failure is an issue. It’s also been raised where **natural acts** have occurred which make an accident unavoidable even if reasonable care is used, such as tornadoes, perils at sea, ice storms, etc. They have also used it in cases involving **animals**, e.g., one in which a bee entered the defendant’s car and distracted the driver.

It really goes more to the **elements of causation**, or **breach of standard**. To prove this defence, the defendant is arguing that some other event caused the accident (the defendant’s negligence was not the “but for” cause), or that the defendant was not negligent at all. So “inevitable accident” arguments tend to come up earlier in the litigation, with a defendant trying to **disprove elements the plaintiff is trying to prove**.








