---
layout: post
title: L503 Module 3
date: 2026-01-24
draft: false
categories:
  - Law
tags:
  - LAW_V 503E E_99C 2025W2 Tort Law - Tort Law
  - Module 3
---

# Standard of Care and Special Standards

## Overview

In the previous module you were introduced to the elements of negligence and the specific element of the duty of care. In this module we will examine the next negligence element, **the standard of care**. We will cover the **ordinary** and **special** standard of care owed to others and the **burden proof** in negligence claims. 

!!! note "Readings"

    - Philip H Osborne, *The Law of Torts*, 6th ed. (Toronto: Irwin Law, 2020), pp **27-54**
    - ***Vaughn v Menlove*** (1837, UK)
    - ***Gloster v. Toronto Electric Light Co.***, [1906 CanLII 11 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1tsmh){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Amos v New Brunswick (Electric Power Commission) (1976)***, [1977] 1 S.C.R. 500
    - ***Priestman v. Colangelo, Shynall and Smythson***, [1959 CanLII 14 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1tvpf){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Bolton v Stone*** [1951] A.C. 850 (H.L.) [Note 16]
    - ***Paris v Stepney Borough Council*** [1951] A.C. 367 (H.L.) [Note 17]
    - ***Ware's Taxi Ltd. v. Gilliham***, [1949 CanLII 42 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/22vsx){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Ter Neuzen v. Korn***, [1995 CanLII 72 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1frhk){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Fiala v. Cechmanek***, [1999 ABQB 489 (CanLII)](https://canlii.ca/t/5p3n){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Fontaine v. British Columbia (Official Administrator)***, [1998 CanLII 814 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fqt1){:target=" \_blank"}

## Topic 1: The Standard of Care and The Reasonable Person

<p class="highlight blue" markdown="1">*The reasonable man adapts himself to the world; the unreasonable one persists in trying to adapt the world to himself. Therefore, all progress depends on the unreasonable man.* <br><br>
- **George Bernard Shaw**</p>

The next negligence element we will discuss is the standard of care. This is usually the most **commonly litigated issue** of all the elements in a negligence lawsuit, i.e., the aspect of a negligence claim that is most often in dispute, and therefore takes up the most time in court. In many cases (for example, in motor vehicle accident cases), it is clear that the defendant owes a duty of care to the plaintiff. 

The question really in issue in most negligence cases is **whether the defendant breached the standard of care on the facts in that case**. As noted above, there are two questions to be answered under standard of care:

- What is the **test for the standard of care**? This is **a question of law** for judges (not juries) to determine, and an appeal court can reverse the lower court’s decision if the appeal court disagrees with the lower court’s definition of the test.
- **Was that standard breached**? In other words, was the defendant negligent (“negligent” here is used in the narrow sense we saw earlier). This is **a question of fact** for the trier-of-fact: either the jury, or, if there is no jury, the judge. Appeal courts generally won’t overturn trial court decisions on questions of fact, unless there was some error of law in the way the trial court applied the rule to the facts. In some rare cases of “**palpable and overriding error**” on the facts, the appeal court may also reverse a trial court’s factual finding. 

There will be further discussion of what constitutes a “palpable and overriding error” in a case we will read later in the course, ***Galaske v. O'Donnell***, [1994 CanLII 128 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1frvm){:target=" \_blank"}.

In this Module we discuss the **general rule**, which applies to most people most of the time: 

> the reasonable person of ordinary intelligence, acting prudently and taking reasonable steps to avoid putting others at risk. 

I will focus on the general rule, known as the “reasonable person” standard, and on reasonable vs. unreasonable risk (which is critical in courts’ analysis of whether the standard was breached). The other cases in this week’s readings are on situations in which an external source helps to define the standard: **custom or statute**.

### 1. General Rule for Standard of Care: Reasonable Person Test






