---
layout: post
title: L503 Module 2
date: 2026-01-14
draft: false
categories:
  - Law
tags:
  - LAW_V 503E E_99C 2025W2 Tort Law - Tort Law
  - Module 2
---

# The Law of Negligence

## Overview

!!! note "Readings"

    - Philip H Osborne, *The Law of Torts*, 6th ed. (Toronto: Irwin Law, 2020), pp 25-27; 70-99; 154-168.
    - ***Donoghue v. Stevenson***, [1932 CanLII 536 (FOREP)](https://canlii.ca/t/gghx0){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Cooper v. Hobart***, [2001 SCC 79](https://canlii.ca/t/51xc){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Reibl v. Hughes***, [1980 CanLII 23 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1mjvr){:target=" \_blank"}

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">**Module Content**</p>

## Topic 1: Negligence Elements

The word negligence can have at least two legal meanings. 

- **Broad meaning:** an area of tort law dealing with **negligence liability**. It refers to the entire cause of action or claim, including all its constituent elements. So you might say: “The plaintiff sued the defendant in negligence.”
- **Narrow meaning:** one element in the claim, **the standard of care**. It refers to behaviour that has fallen below the standard of care, i.e., careless behaviour. So: “The defendant was negligent by not taking reasonable care, and injured the plaintiff.”

**The Negligence Cause of Action (Broad meaning)**

When we consider the negligence cause of action, various elements must be proved. 

- **Duty of care:** Does person A have a legal duty, or obligation, to take care towards person B? Not all relationships give rise to a duty of care. This is a question of law to be decided by the judge.
- **The standard of care and its breach:** Has A acted in a manner below the standard of care? There are actually two questions here: 
    - (1) What is the appropriate standard in this case? 
    - (2) Did the defendant fail to live up to that standard? 

    On the first question, the test for the standard in any given situation is the “**reasonable person test**”: what would a reasonable person do in this situation? This is **a question of law**. It turns on the general type of activity the defendant was engaged in, or the general type of defendant this is (e.g., a professional with skill or a regular person?). 
    
    The second question focuses on the facts of the **defendant’s conduct** in this particular case: If A acted below the relevant standard of care, we say A was negligent (narrow meaning). It is a “**question of fact**” whether A acted below the standard of care (as opposed to a “question of law”). 

- **Causation:** Did A’s negligence actually cause B’s loss? Even if conduct falls below the standard of care, that does not mean that it is the cause of B’s loss. This is a factual issue, and the main test is the “**but for test**,” as in: “But for the defendant’s conduct [i.e., if it had not happened], would the loss have occurred?” The answer is often speculative and hard to determine, after the fact (hindsight may be 20/20, but it is not perfect). 
- **Remoteness of damages:** Was B’s loss **reasonably foreseeable** by A? In other words, if A thought about it, could A have reasonably foreseen that A’s conduct would result in B’s loss? There must be some connection between A’s conduct and B’s loss that is within reason. Another way of saying this is: A’s conduct must be a proximate cause of B’s loss. **If the loss was not foreseeable, it would be too “remote,” and A would not be liable.** 
- **Actual loss:** Some torts do not require proof of loss (e.g. defamation, which we will study later in the course) but negligence does. B must prove **recognizable damage or loss**. 

The plaintiff (person B in the summaries above), a.k.a. the party who is suing, has the responsibility or burden of proving each of these five elements. **The plaintiff must satisfy the judge or jury that all of these elements exist in this case**. 

The distinction between **questions of law, questions of fact, and questions of mixed law and fact** were summarized in ***Canada (Director of Investigation and Research) v. Southam Inc.***, [1997 CanLII 385 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fr34){:target=" \_blank"}, where **Iacobucci J.** stated for the court at para 35:

> Briefly stated, questions of law are questions about what the correct **legal test** is; questions of fact are questions about what actually took place between the parties; and questions of mixed law and fact are questions about whether the **facts satisfy the legal tests**.

!!! danger "Module 2 - Topic 1: Practice Question"

    1. An obligation to take care in one's actions towards another person is:
        - [x] duty of care
        - [ ] standard of care
        - [ ] causation
        - [ ] broad meaning of negligence

## Topic 2: Introduction to Duty of Care

A **duty of care** is a legal obligation by one party to take reasonable care to see that the party’s conduct does not harm another. It may be helpful now that you begin to think of **the elements of negligence as a series of hurdles the plaintiff must jump over**. 

**Duty of care is a purely legal hurdle:** there are some persons a plaintiff cannot sue, because those persons don’t owe the plaintiff a duty of care.

**General Test for Duty of Care**

in ***Donoghue v. Stevenson***, [1932 CanLII 536 (FOREP)](https://canlii.ca/t/gghx0){:target=" \_blank"}, the House of Lards established a new general test for whether one party owes another a duty of care, a test that now applies to all types of relationships.

!!! info "*Donoghue*"

    - It is one of the most important cases you will come across in the law of negligence, because it established the basic framework to determine when a duty of care arises. You will hear it referred to as the “**Paisley Snail**” case or the “**snail in the bottle**” case.
    - In ***Donoghue***, a manufacturer was successfully sued by a consumer (as opposed to the purchaser) for the first time. It truly expanded the law, enabling Ms Donoghue, and, subsequently, almost any consumer, to bring a cause of action in negligence against the manufacturer.
    - After ***Donoghue***, the test of whether a duty of care arises was no longer restricted to already established categories of relationships. It is now based on general principles of “neighbourhood”. The test, known as the **neighbourhood principle**, is that one owes a duty to another to take reasonable care from foreseeable harm where a sufficient relationship of proximity between the parties is established.
    -  **Who, then, in law is my neighbour?** The answer seems to be persons who are **so closely and directly affected by my act that I ought reasonably to have them in contemplation as being so affected** when I am directing my mind to the acts or omissions which are called in question.
    -  Legal proximity exists if it is **reasonably foreseeable** that your conduct may injure a person (or type of person, e.g., consumers). If there is sufficient proximity, you owe the other person a duty to take reasonable care (**element 2 of negligence**) against foreseeable harm (**element 4**).
    -  The result of this ruling was that a general principle of liability could now be applied to find a legal duty of care in any situation where a duty had not already been recognized, such as between manufacturer and consumer. Modern negligence law was born.

## Topic 3: Further Development of Duty of Care

***Anns v London Borough of Merton*** [1978] A.C. 728 (H.L.) is a pivotal case in the development of the law on duty of care in Canada. ***Cooper v. Hobart***, [2001 SCC 79](https://canlii.ca/t/51xc){:target=" \_blank"} and later cases have modified it into a made-in-Canada version that could be referred to as the Cooper test (but is still customarily referred to as the **Anns/Cooper test**). ***Anns*** is still good law in Canada, as modified by ***Cooper*** in 2001.

**Lord Wilberforce** confirmed that a duty of care can encompass claims based on loss that is purely financial. But he also laid out a two-stage test for finding a duty of care in such novel situations. Here is the two-stage test, now known as the “**Anns test**”:

- Stage 1: There must be a relationship of neighbourhood (foreseeability and proximity) between the parties (the ***Donoghue* test**). If so, then a “***prima facie** duty of care*” arises, and you move on to stage 2; if not, case closed.
- Stage 2: There must **not be any policy reasons** why a duty of care should not apply to this type of relationship, or why it should be restricted in any way. If there are such policy reasons, the duty of care is negated: case closed.

!!! info "*Cooper*"

    - The issue in this case was whether the Registrar owed a duty of care to the investing public to oversee the investment activities of its registered brokers. This was a novel duty of care situation, as there was no existing recognized category of duty of care between investors and such a Registrar.
    - The Supreme Court of Canada reaffirmed that in novel cases, determining whether a duty of care exists depends on the 2-stage test outlined in ***Anns***. Then the Supreme Court of Canada went on to add what it calls a “gloss” on the **Anns test**, in which the Court “hones the role of policy concerns” that ***Anns*** raised.
    - What the case really does is to take the idea of policy considerations and to **reallocate** them: some now fit into stage 1, which is focused on whether there is proximity between these particular parties. Other types of policy concerns remain part of stage 2, which is the stage that gives courts discretion to negate a duty of care, and therefore a negligence claim, even in cases in which there is proximity between the parties. 
    - The difference is that the policy considerations relevant under stage 1 are “**internal**” to the relationship between these specific parties. By contrast, the policy considerations under stage 2 are “**external**”: they are focused more on the effect of the decision on society at large, as well as on institutions (such as government regulators) similar to those involved in this case.

## Discussion: Module 2 - Topic 3

***Cooper*** can be criticized as a retreat from what some legal scholars viewed as the Supreme Court’s retreat from a more pro-plaintiff position. Please consider the following questions. 

- What do you think of the judgment?
- In your opinion was it well-written?

## Topic 4: Categories of Duty of Care

The Supreme Court in ***Cooper*** held that the concept of “proximity” as set out in the ***Donoghue*** itself takes policy factors into account, and that after ***Cooper*** those policy factors are now made more explicit. See para 22: 

> [F]oreseeability alone was not enough; there must also be a close and direct relationship of proximity or neighbourhood. 

So the Supreme Court of Canada breaks the neighbourhood test into two components, **making stage 1 (as named by** ***Anns***) **into a two-part test**. 

The Supreme Court of Canada in ***Cooper*** also held that there is **no need** to do an ***Anns/Cooper*** analysis where the parties fit into an **established relationship** for which a duty of care has already been recognized.

Here is a succinct outline of the **Anns/Cooper test**:

!!! info "Anns/Cooper test"

    - **Preliminary stage:** Recognized relationship of duty of care (a.k.a. established category)? If so, there is no need to do the duty analysis. You move on to the next element of negligence, standard of care.
    - **Stage 1: Neighbourhood principle**
        - (a) **Foreseeability**: Is it reasonably foreseeable that a party’s conduct would likely cause loss to the other party? If no, case closed. If yes, move on to:
        - (b) **Proximity**: Is the relationship between the parties so “close and direct” that it would be “just and fair” to impose a duty of care? This includes a personal relationship but also policy considerations specific to the relationship between these specific parties (“**internal policy factors**”). If no, case closed. If yes, there is a prima facie duty of care, and we move on to:
    - **Stage 2: Policy considerations**
        - Policy considerations that are **external** to these parties, which justify negating or restricting the duty of care. Courts ask: are there any broad policy reasons affecting society at large that justify restricting a duty of care in this situation? Such reasons include indeterminate liability and negative effects on the legal system (such as the “spectre of indeterminate liability”, i.e., “opening the floodgates”), economy, and even social relations.

A useful exercise is to identify **four specific factors** the Supreme Court of Canada sets out in that decision under **stage 1(b)**. 

What the Supreme Court means by proximity is: are there any policy reasons why this particular relationship should give rise to a duty of care, based on various aspects of the relationship, including the parties’ **representations** to each other, **reliance** on those representations, reasonable **expectations** about each other’s conduct, and any applicable **statute**.

There are specific existing categories of duty of care that Osborne analyzes in the text (at pp 78-97). These categories represent fact patterns and legal analysis that do not always apply the **Anns/Cooper test**. ... the **Anns/Cooper test** is reserved for “**novel**” cases not falling within an existing category of duty of care.

**Additional Commentary on Forseeability**

There are, however, cases in which foreseeability is still debatable. For these, it is important to know that the neighbourhood principle laid out in ***Donoghue*** actually encompasses two intermingled ideas: 

whether it is reasonably foreseeable that the defendant’s conduct could create the kind of risk that would lead to the loss that resulted (**foreseeable risk of loss**), and whether it is reasonably foreseeable that the loss could result to the plaintiff (**foreseeable plaintiff**). The first focuses more on the defendant’s conduct and its physical effects, while the second focuses on the victim (e.g. was it foreseeable that loss would result to that particular person?). 

Some cases focus on one or the other, but **for the duty of care to arise, both should be satisfied**.

At the duty of care stage of analysis, what matters is whether it is reasonably foreseeable that some harm could result from the defendant’s conduct. The kind and degree of danger a reasonable person might foresee helps to determine the “who” of duty of care: which people, and how many, the defendant owes a duty of care to.

## Topic 5: Formulating the Duty of Care

... a loss to investors was foreseeable, since the **foreseeability test**, after ***Cooper***, is often fairly easy to meet.

That leads the Court, at para 43, to analyze whether there is “**proximity**,” which I have labelled stage 1(b). To get a feel for what 1(b) is about, and how its policy factors are distinct from those under stage 2, you should read paras **44-50** of ***Cooper*** closely. On these facts, the Supreme Court found that the relationship between the Registrar and Mr. Cooper (as well as other investors) was not so “close and direct” that it would be “just and fair” to impose a duty of care. The Court emphasizes at para 44 that the Registrar’s duty is to the public as a whole. It is not necessarily there to protect the interests of individual investors.

Even though the Court answers stage 1(b) with a “no,” it goes on to consider stage 2, at paras **51-55**. On the facts in ***Cooper***, the Supreme Court decides that, even if the plaintiff had met both parts of stage 1, there should be no duty, due to the **floodgates concern**.

<p class="highlight red" markdown="1">Remember that the test in ***Cooper*** only applies to finding **new duties of care**. Already recognized relationships giving rise to a duty of care **need not** go through this analysis.</p>

In ***Edwards v. Law Society of Upper Canada***, [2001 SCC 80](https://canlii.ca/t/51xf){:target=" \_blank"}, the Supreme Court of Canada in also found that there was no duty of care for a regulatory agency (the *Law Society of BC*) towards clients of a lawyer who suffered a loss due to his shoddy practices.

Still, ***Cooper*** has made it **harder to find duties of care** in novel situations and some practitioners and scholars have criticized it for that.

!!! danger "Module 2 - Topic 4: Practice Question"

    1. In cases in which foreseeability is still debatable, the neighbourhood principle laid out in ***Donoghue*** encompasses two intermingled ideas: **foreseeable risk of loss** and (choose from dropdown list below):
        - [x] the **foreseeable plaintiff**
        - [ ] the forseeable defendant
        - [ ] the unforseeable event

## Topic 6: Duties and Human Reproduction

Osborne covers this in text under Human Reproduction (at pp 163-168). Does a party owe a duty of care to a fetus? These cases can be divided into two categories: **prenatal injuries** and **preconception torts**, though the case law doesn’t explicitly follow such categories.

**Prenatal injury**

No tort can be committed while the child is a fetus as **Canadian law does not currently recognize a fetus as a human person with legal rights**. As the text notes, the parent or guardian would have rights to sue for her injuries related to a prenatal condition that are due to negligence but there is no right of action in the fetus itself. However, **once born a child can sue a third party who was negligent and caused harm to the child when it was still a fetus**. 

The courts have held that it is foreseeable that loss to the mother could result in loss to the fetus. **Both the mother and the child** (once alive - through a guardian) **can sue** if a third party is responsible (see text at 163).

Duty of care was never argued in this case, just **standard of care and causation**.

But what if the mother herself was the negligent party? What if she, say, caused a car accident and her fetus was injured? The Supreme Court of Canada considered this issue in ***Dobson (Litigation Guardian of) v. Dobson***, [1999 CanLII 698 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fqkz){:target=" \_blank"}. (text at p 163), and held that the child could not sue its mother. The Court in ***Dobson*** applied the **Anns/Cooper test** and found that although a *prima facie* duty of care arose under stage 1, **the test failed for policy reasons under stage 2**. As such, no duty of care was owed by a mother to its unborn child.

**Preconception Torts**

Preconception tort cases involve some negligence prior to the child being conceived, resulting in injury to the child when born. The negligence may be exposure to some **environmental factor** (e.g., a hazardous chemical), **defective product**s (e.g., drugs), or negligent **medical advice** (e.g., prescribing medication for the mother at the time of conception): anything that affects the **parents’ ability to conceive** a healthy child.

Parents have also sued for what is called the “wrongful birth” of their child. Parents have been successful in these claims and have been able to recover the additional cost of raising a disabled child, vs. a healthy one.

Another, more controversial, possibility is the disabled child itself suing the tortfeasor in negligence. For the child’s claim to be successful, the court would have to find that it would be better for the child to be dead than alive. For **policy reasons** the courts have declined to make this finding.

The text notes two cases from 2008 (***Paxton v. Ramji***, [2008 ONCA 697 (CanLII)](https://canlii.ca/t/215b2){:target=" \_blank"} and ***Bovingdon v. Hergott***, [2008 ONCA 2 (CanLII)](https://canlii.ca/t/1vc5b){:target=" \_blank"}) in which the Ontario Court of Appeal took the approach of using the **Cooper test** to determine whether the physician owed a duty of care to the unborn child, rather than rejecting the claim outright as a “wrongful life” suit. In both cases, the judge found that **no duty of care was owed due to lack of proximity** (stage 1(b)), since the doctor’s duty to the patient/mother would conflict with any duty of care to the fetus.

As noted, the parents can usually sue for their own losses due to birth defects, or the loss of a fetus, but **there is no claim on behalf of the fetus itself**. The issue in unborn children claims is whether the child, once born alive but damaged, can receive compensation for its loss of quality of life and for lost future income.

## Topic 7: Doctrine of Informed Consent

***Reibl v. Hughes***, [1980 CanLII 23 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1mjvr){:target=" \_blank"} is a landmark Supreme Court of Canada decision dealing with the **duty of medical professionals** to warn patients about all aspects of their illness and treatment, including nature of the illness and the risks and benefits of treatment.

***Reibl*** makes it apparent that doctors must make some effort to ask their patients about possible **special considerations**, and to ensure they **understand the proposed treatment** well.

The Court found that given the breach in standard of care, and breach in duty to disclose that the surgery would not correct the plaintiff’s headaches, a “**reasonable person**” acting as the plaintiff would likely not have undergone the surgery at that time. 

## Topic 8: Breach of Statutory Duty

***Breach of statute as evidence of a breach of the standard of care***

Defendants attempt to rely on compliance with statutory standards to prove they lived up to a duty and reasonable standard of care and were not negligent. On the other hand, plaintiffs rely on non-compliance with statutory standards to show the opposite, that the defendant was negligent.

In the landmark case of ***The Queen (Can.) v. Saskatchewan Wheat Pool***, [1983 CanLII 21 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1lpdb){:target=" \_blank"} (see text p 178) the Court considered the following issue: **did a breach of statute automatically give rise to tort liability?** The basic points of the Supreme Court ruling are summarized in the text at p 178.

One of the key points from ***Wheat Pool*** is that a defendant’s failure to comply with a statutory or regulatory standard can be evidence of a breach of the standard of care, but it is not negligent conduct *per se*. Courts still have to assess whether that standard was a reasonable one. 

And there is another important limit on using statutory provisions. Courts are reluctant to allow a plaintiff to rely on a defendant’s statutory breach as evidence of negligence where the damage that resulted was completely different from the **purpose** of the statutory provision.

If a defendant has breached a statutory provision, a plaintiff will not be able to rely on that to determine breach of the standard of care unless the plaintiff also shows:

- The risk that resulted was of the type the statute was meant to protect against, and
- The plaintiff is of the class of persons that the statute was designed to protect.

***Compliance with statute as a defence***

Defendants can also use statutes in argument about the standard of care. The Supreme Court of Canada addressed this issue in ***Ryan v. Victoria (City)***, [1999 CanLII 706 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fqpf){:target=" \_blank"}. At issue was whether a railway could be negligent in the design and maintenance of its tracks, if it complied with regulations under the Railway Act.

Simply put, the **statutory standard must pass the common-law standard of reasonableness** if a defendant wishes to rely on compliance as a defence. This is the same rule courts have followed in determining whether compliance with **custom** exonerates a defendant.

!!! danger "Module 2 - Topic 7: Practice Questions"

    1. The law of negligence can apply to cases in which a party has suffered personal injury or property loss, but not **purely economic loss**, since economic loss raises the spectre of indeterminate liability.
        - [ ] True 
        - [x] False 

    2. In ***Dobson v Dobson***, the court found that the mother owed no duty of care because
        - [x] of broad policy considerations of the stage-2 type. 
        - [ ] no prima facie duty of care arose under the Anns test. 
        - [ ] the child had other remedies available. 
        - [ ] injury to the foetus was not foreseeable. 
        - [ ] all of the above. 

    3. **Nonfeasance** is sometimes actionable.
        - [x] True 
        - [ ] False 

    4. **A duty to act** arises in all but which of the following situations?
        - [ ] You host a BYOB Hallowe’en party at your house. The handrail on the stairs is loose, and one of your drunk guests falls when it comes loose. 
        - [ ] Your 3-and-a-half-year-old, who can’t swim, jumps into a swimming pool. 
        - [ ] Your employee falls off a ladder while stocking the shelves. 
        - [ ] A suspect tries to harm herself while in police custody. 
        - [ ] A passenger on a ferry has a heart attack. You are an off-duty doctor travelling on the ferry. No one else is around, so you start to help the person. When the waves get rough, you change your mind and walk away. 

## Module 2 Summary

In this Module we learned general rules for an essential element in proving negligence: duty of care. We saw that a duty of care is already recognized in certain relationships, based on **precedents**. For these “**novel cases**,” courts apply a general test based on neighbourhood and policy considerations to determine whether a duty of care arises. The current version of the test in Canada is drawn from the landmark ***Cooper*** case.

#### <p class="highlight yellow" markdown="1">Textbook Summary</p>

**Chapter 2 NEGLIGENCE: BASIC PRINCIPLES**

**A. INTRODUCTION**

There are three core elements: the **negligent act**, **causation**, and **damage**. 

The negligent act is determined by identifying the appropriate **standard of care** and applying it to the facts of the case. Causation is established by showing a **link** between the defendant’s negligent act and the plaintiff’s damage. Damage is the vital element that triggers the claim and launches the litigation process. 

A defendant is not responsible for every consequence of his negligent act. There are two critically important control devices in negligence law: **duty of care** and **remoteness of damage**. 

Negligence liability cannot be established unless the judge recognizes that the defendant owes the plaintiff a duty of care in respect of the plaintiff’s interests. 

Remoteness of damage plays a similar role. Causation cannot be denied, but fairness may dictate that the defendant should be sheltered from responsibility for some or all of the consequences of his negligent conduct. In such circumstances, the court may hold that the consequences are too remote and not compensable by the defendant.

Once the plaintiff has established these elements, the defendant may assert any of **four defences**. 

- **Contributory negligence** by the plaintiff is a partial defence leading to a proportionate reduction in the quantum of damages. 
- **Voluntary assumption of risk** is a complete defence that arises where the plaintiff consents to the defendant’s negligence and its consequences. 
- **Illegality** operates to deny a claim, such as one for future illegal earnings, that would subvert the integrity of the legal system. 
- Finally, a defendant may assert that, in spite of indications to the contrary, the loss was caused, not by his fault, but by an **inevitable accident**. This, too, is a complete defence.

This framework of negligence law is typical of a **fault-based** civil liability system. In practice, the negligence system operates quite differently. It is predominantly a negligence/insurance system that spreads or distributes losses caused by negligent conduct to a broad segment of the community. 

Negligence law is imbued with an unresolved tension between **loss-shifting rules** and **loss-spreading realities**. Modern Canadian negligence law continues to seek an appropriate balance between these two competing visions of its ultimate purpose. 

**E. THE DUTY OF CARE**

In 1932 the famous case of ***Donoghue v. Stevenson***, [1932 CanLII 536 (FOREP)](https://canlii.ca/t/gghx0){:target=" \_blank"} was decided. In a majority decision, it held that a manufacturer of products does owe a duty to the ultimate consumer to take reasonable care to prevent defects in its products which are likely to cause damage to person or property.

Its fame was secured by a passage of **Lord Atkin**’s judgment where he attempted to formulate a general conception of relationships which gives rise to a duty of care. It is known as the **neighbour principle**. He stated: 

> You must take reasonable care to avoid acts or omissions which you can reasonably foresee would be likely to injure your neighbour. **Who, then, in law is my neighbour?** The answer seems to be, persons who are so closely and directly affected by my act that I ought reasonably to have them in contemplation as being so affected when I am directing my mind to the acts or omissions which are called in question.

In 1977 **Lord Wilberforce** in ***Anns v London Borough of Merton*** [1978] A.C. 728 (H.L.) (see wikipedia [link](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anns_v_Merton_LBC){:target=" \_blank"}) changed all of this. He called for a two-stage analysis of the duty of care issue, which separated the consideration of foreseeability from the policy assessment of societal need. He stated: 

> First one has to ask whether, as between the alleged wrongdoer and the person who has suffered damage there is a sufficient relationship of proximity or neighbourhood such that, in the reasonable contemplation of the former, carelessness on his part may be likely to cause damage to the latter, in which case a *prima facie* duty of care arises. 
> 
> Secondly, if the first question is answered affirmatively, it is necessary to consider whether there are any considerations which ought to negative, or to reduce or limit the scope of the duty or the class of person to whom it is owed or the damages to which a breach of may give rise.

The second branch of the test invited a full and open debate about the societal costs and benefits of recognizing a duty of care. It not only allowed the *prima facie* duty of care to be **negated** on policy grounds, but also allowed the duty to be **restricted or modified** to meet policy concerns.

It was not until the beginning of the twenty-first century that the Supreme Court of Canada reformulated the test of duty of care in ***Cooper v. Hobart***, [2001 SCC 79](https://canlii.ca/t/51xc){:target=" \_blank"}.

In a unanimous judgment, the Court outlined the correct approach to the duty of care issue. 

- First, it is necessary to decide if the case falls within any **recognized category** of relationships where a duty of care has previously been recognized or if it is closely analogous to a recognized category. In those circumstances, a *prima facie* duty of care may be posited. 
- If the case falls outside an established category, ... the Court articulated a **three-stage test** for the “**novel**” case. 
    - First, **foreseeability** of damage to the plaintiff remains an essential element of a duty of care but it is not sufficient in itself to establish a *prima facie* duty of care. 
    - Second, there must be a proximate relationship between the parties. **Proximity** focuses on both the “closeness and directness” of the relationship between the parties and on policy factors to determine, overall, whether it is fair and just to impose a duty of care. A *prima facie* duty of care is established when foreseeability and proximity have been established. 
    - The third stage (stage two in ***Anns***) involves a consideration of **residual policy factors**. Residual policy factors are not concerned with the relationship between the parties. They are concerned with the impact of the proposed duty of care on other legal obligations, the legal system, and on society generally.

**Foreseeability**

A duty of care is not owed to the world. It is owed only to those whom the defendant might reasonably foresee as being adversely affected by his failure to take care. 

The famous American case of ***Palsgraf v Long Island*** R Co126 (see [wikipdea reference](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Palsgraf_v._Long_Island_Railroad_Co.){:target=" \_blank"}) is illustrative. The court held that the defendant owed no duty of care to Ms. Palsgraf. The guards may have been negligent, and they may reasonably have perceived some risk to the passenger and his parcel, but the plaintiff was beyond the range of foreseeable danger.

**Proximity**

Proximity requires a consideration of *factual* closeness and *policy* factors.

In ***Cooper***, proximity in this sense was weak. The registrar had a general statutory power to promote an efficient operation of the mortgage marketplace and to act in the public interest but there was no close and direct relationship with individual investors. 

Proximity also depends upon policy considerations. In ***Cooper***, for example, it was held that it would not be fair and just to impose a duty of care to a wide range of anonymous investors with whom the registrar had no direct communication. There can be no doubt that proximity has a central role in the ***Anns/Cooper* test** and that most cases will be decided at this stage. 

**Residual Policy Factors**

Policy considerations also operate on a **macro level**. These are referred to as residual policy factors, which may negate or limit a prima facie duty of care. They include the overall needs and interests of the **community at large** and the impact of the posited duty of care on other legal obligations and the legal system generally. 

Although ***Cooper*** was decided at the proximity stage, ... The public policy and quasi-judicial nature of many of the registrar’s functions, the spectre of indeterminate and extensive liability, and the undesirability of allocating private investment losses ultimately to the tax-paying public all dictated caution.

**Three of the existing categories of duty of care**

***(a) Duties of Affirmative Action***

As a general rule, negligence law does not oblige a person to provide assistance to others, or to confer benefits on them, or to rescue them from situations of danger not of the person’s own making. 

Negligence law dictates that you must not expose people to the risk of injury, not that you must help them. This dichotomy is captured by the terms **misfeasance** (dangerous conduct) and **nonfeasance** (the omission to confer a benefit). 

**Affirmative duties** to act for the benefit of others in peril were regarded as exclusively within the realm of **moral and religious precepts**. 

In the latter part of the twentieth century, judicial policy changed. Nevertheless, the courts have continued to assert that there is **no general** duty to rescue a person who finds herself in danger from a source completely unrelated to the defendant. The growing number of duties of affirmative action continue, therefore, to be characterized as **exceptions to the general principle** of no liability for nonfeasance. 

The main conceptual vehicle used to extend the range of duties of affirmative action is that of a **special relationship**.

A number of special relationships have been recognized for the purposes of establishing a duty of affirmative action. They include:

- contractual and quasi-contractual relationships such as employer and employee; 
- fiduciary relationships such as parent and child; 
- professional relationships such as doctor and patient; 
- relationships of authority, control, and supervision, such as teacher and pupil or custodian and prisoner; 
- the relationship of occupier and visitor; and 
- the relationship between professional rescuers such as firefighters, police, and emergency personnel and citizens in danger. 

This catalogue of relationships is **not exhaustive** and it is **not closed**. 

The Court in ***Childs v. Desormeaux***, [2006 SCC 18](https://canlii.ca/t/1n5gp){:target=" \_blank"} did offer the opinion that the existing cases recognizing **duties of affirmative action** fall into three broad classes. 

- First, there are those cases such as ***Crocker v. Sundance Northwest Resorts Ltd.***, [1988 CanLII 45 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1ftcw){:target=" \_blank"} where the defendants intentionally invite third parties to an inherent or obvious risk that they have created or to which they have contributed. 
- Second, there are cases where there are paternalisic relationships of supervision and control producing an imbalance of power and vulnerability, as in the parent-child relationship. 
- Third, there are cases such as ***Jordan House Ltd. v. Menow***, [1973 CanLII 16 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1twvq){:target=" \_blank"} where the defendants offer services to the general public that include attendant responsibilities to act with special care to minimize risk to the users of those services. 

There are **two further situations** that are likely to generate duties of affirmative action. 

- The first relates to defendants who are under no initial or threshold duty to rescue but who, nevertheless, **voluntarily** embark on a course of conduct designed to assist a person in danger. 
    - ... the usual duty of care attaches to the defendant as soon as he commences a rescue. This certainly appears to be the assumption or premise underlying the spate of **Good Samaritan** statutes that have been passed in most provinces. The statutes address the concern that the imposition of a duty of care on voluntary rescuers may create a significant disincentive to altruistic conduct. The **Good Samaritan** legislation seeks to remedy this impediment to rescue by restricting the potential liability of a volunteer to acts of gross negligence or recklessness, thereby removing any inhibitions they may have about rescuing because of the fear of legal liability. 
- The second situation arises where the defendant, **without fault**, has created a dangerous situation. It is not unreasonable to expect the creator of the peril to take reasonable steps to abate it, to warn of the danger, or to alert the appropriate authorities of it. 

***(b) The Duty Owed to Rescuers***

The issue of liability to a rescuer arises where the defendant, A, has negligently placed B or themselves in a position of danger and C (rescuer), the plaintiff, is injured or killed in the course of a rescue attempt.

The courts now encourage altruistic conduct by **protecting rescuers** from virtually all losses arising from the rescue attempt. The rescuer has become one of the heroes of the common law and an action brought by a rescuer rarely fails.

The modern view has been captured by the words of **Lord Denning** in ***Videan v British Transport Commission***.

> It seems to me that, if a person by his fault creates a situation of peril, he must answer for it to any person who attempts to rescue the per- son who is in danger. He owes a duty to such a person above all others. The rescuer may act instinctively out of humanity or deliber- ately out of courage. But whichever it is, so long as it is not wanton interference, if the rescuer is killed or injured in the attempt, he can recover damages from the one whose fault has been the cause of it.

It has also been held that the rescuer’s claim is **independent from that of the imperilled person**. Consequently, the claim of a rescuer cannot be denied because the defendant owes no duty of care to the imperilled person or because the defendant has a valid defence against any claim made by the imperilled person. Furthermore, persons who, as a consequence of their own negligence, place themselves in positions of peril owe a duty of care to their rescuers.

It should also be noted that arguments by the defendant based on the ultimate **futility** of the rescue or on the **contributory negligence** of the plaintiff are not likely to succeed.

<p class="highlight blue" markdown="1">One policy underlying and uniting both the duties of affirmative action and the duty of care owed to a rescuer is the **judicial approval and desire to promote altruistic conduct**. Negligence law uses both the carrot (protection of rescuers from harm arising in a rescue attempt) and the stick (duties to rescue).</p>

***(c) Psychiatric Injury (Nervous Shock)***

The judicial approach to psychiatric injury is cautious and conservative and reflects a **pro-defendant** inclination that seems out of step with the expansionary trends of modern negligence law. The primary reason for the slow recognition of psychiatric injury claims is the fear of unleashing a flood of litigation.

The processing of psychiatric injury claims also presents some **technical** challenges. There may also be **cultural** reasons contributing to the resistance to claims for psychiatric injury. The stigma of mental illness has not been removed from society.

Until recently, there was no liability for any psychiatric harm unless it satisfied the concept of **nervous shock**. Nervous shock is defined as a severe emotional trauma that manifests itself in a **physical disorder** or in a **recognizable psychiatric illness** such as clinical depression or post-traumatic stress disorder. 

The line between **nervous shock** as conventionally defined and **severe emotional distress** is not an easy one to draw, and there is some unevenness in the judicial interpretation of nervous shock. This led the Supreme Court in 2008 to define actionable mental injury as “**any serious and prolonged mental disturbance**” and to distinguish such harm from the **ordinary anxieties and fears** that come with living in a civil society. 

**Chapter 3: Special Topcis in Negligence**

**C. THE DOCTRINE OF INFORMED CONSENT TO MEDICAL TREATMENT**

The participatory model treats the relationship between the physician and the patient as a partnership in which the patient plays an active role in understanding and controlling the course of her medical treatment. ... the trend towards a participatory model is clear and it has been fostered and promoted by the courts by the doctrine of **informed consent to medical treatment**.

The courts have, therefore, recognized that physicians not only have an obligation to diagnose and treat with due care, but they also have an obligation to inform their patients of the nature of their illness and the nature, risks, and benefits of the proposed treatment.

The landmark decision is ***Reibl v. Hughes***, [1980 CanLII 23 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1mjvr){:target=" \_blank"}. The Supreme Court imposed liability on the defendant surgeon for his failure to secure the **plaintiff’s informed consent**. 

***(1) The Duty of Care***

A physician is under a duty of care both to **answer** the patient’s questions and to **volunteer** information about the patient’s health and treatment options. The extent and detail of the information to be provided is determined on a case-by-case basis by an application of the standard of care.

***(2) The Standard of Care***

The standard of care adopted in ***Reibl*** is the **full disclosure** standard. The professional standard, which is the conventional way to judge the conduct of a physician, was rejected in ***Reibl*** on the grounds that it was controlled largely by the medical establishment and it might not protect sufficiently the patient’s right to be informed. 

It should be noted, however, that the term full disclosure ... does not require the disclosure of every known risk of the proposed treatment. Sufficient information must be given to **allow a reasonable person in the particular circumstances of the patient to make a decision in her best interests**. 

All material risks must be disclosed. A material risk is one to which a reasonable person in the circumstances of the patient would attach some significance in determining the course of her health care. They include **low risks of serious consequences** and **high risks of minor consequences**. Special and unusual risks that are not common, ordinary, or everyday occurrences but do occur occasionally must also be disclosed. 

The concept of **therapeutic privilege** was recognized by the Supreme Court in ***Reibl***. It permits a physician to withhold or generalize information relating to the risks of treatment where its disclosure may cause psychological harm to the patient. **The privilege has received a narrow interpretation and there is no Canadian case in which it has been applied.**

The physician’s obligation under the **informed consent doctrine** extends only to providing information. The physician is **not** obliged to advise a patient of what she believes to be the patient’s **best course of action**.

**Nurses** can usually rely on physicians to inform patients but they may have some duty to inform a patient in respect of particular techniques or treatment that are within their sphere of responsibility.

***(3) Causation (Cause-in-Fact)***

Informed consent cases raise two cause-in-fact issues. 

- First, it must be proved that the **harm was caused by the procedure** to which the patient consented. 
- Second, it must be proved that the patient **would not have consented** to the procedure if the defendant physician had performed her duty to inform the patient of the material risks of the treatment. If the patient would have made the same decision in any event, causation is not proved.

In ***Reibl***, the Supreme Court resolved the conundrum by adopting a **modified objective test** that asks what the reasonable person in the plaintiff’s particular circumstances would have done.

**D. HUMAN REPRODUCTION**

The expansion of the tort of negligence into the field of human reproduction was heralded by the case of ***Duval et al. v. Seguin et al.***, [1973 CanLII 693 (ON CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/g1705){:target=" \_blank"}.

The court held that the defendant owed a duty of care to the fetus which was actionable by the child as soon as she was born alive. 

Four kinds of cases are canvassed below: cases involving **prenatal injuries**, **wrongful birth** cases, **wrongful life** cases, and **wrongful pregnancy** cases.

***(1) Prenatal Injuries***

No tort is committed while the child is a fetus. In Canadian law a **fetus is not a human person** and, therefore, has no legal rights. Consequently, if a child is stillborn because of the defendant’s negligence, the mother may sue for her personal losses, but there is no right of action in the fetus that might survive to the benefit of his estate and no right of action is available to family members under fatal accidents legislation.

Once the child is born alive, however, he is a human person and may sue in respect of physical or mental disabilities that were caused by the defendant’s prenatal negligence.












