---
layout: post
title: L503 Module 5
date: 2026-02-07
draft: false
categories:
  - Law
tags:
  - LAW_V 503E E_99C 2025W2 Tort Law - Tort Law
  - Module 5
---

# Remoteness of Damage and Remedies

## Overview

In this module, we examine two Negligence concepts related to the single purpose of compensating the plaintiff: **Remoteness of Damage** and **Remedies** (i.e. awards/compensation for Damages). The rules relating to remedies and remoteness determine the **financial outcome of the claim**. 

**Aggravated and punitive damages** are sometimes awarded in **negligence** cases, whether involving personal injury or property loss—though they are especially rare in negligence claims, and are more common (though still exceptional) in claims for **intentional** torts. Regardless of the nature of the claim, the plaintiff needs to prove **certain elements** for each.

The **remoteness** issue concerns the limits to be imposed on the **extent of a defendant’s liability**. There has to be a **balance** between the defendant’s careless fault and the extent of damage that results. The issue at this stage of the negligence action is to determine whether the plaintiff’s injuries are considered “**too remote**” to be recoverable. Or, put another way, was the defendant’s negligent conduct the **proximate cause** of the plaintiff’s loss? 

!!! note "Required Readings"

    - Philip H Osborne, *The Law of Torts*, 6th ed. (Toronto: Irwin Law, 2020), **pp 68-69; 99-112; 123-141; 313-314**.
    - ***Overseas Tankship (U.K.) Ltd . v. Morts Dock and Engineering Co. Ltd.***, The Wagon Mound (No. 1) [1961] A.C. 388 (P.C.) [Note 206]
    - ***Hughes v Lord Advocate [1963]***, A.C. 837 (H.L.) [Note 207]
    - ***Overseas Tankship (U.K.) Ltd. v. Miller Steamship Co. Pty. Ltd., The Wagon Mound (No. 2)***, [1967] 1 A.C. 617 (P.C.) [Note 209]
    - ***Mustapha v. Culligan of Canada Ltd.***, [2008 SCC 27](https://canlii.ca/t/1wz6f){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Smith v. Leech Brain & Co. Ltd. [1962]***, 2 Q.B. 405 (C.A.) [Note 218]
    - ***Andrews v. Grand & Toy Alberta Ltd.***, [1978 CanLII 1 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1mkb5){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Thornton v. School Dist. No. 57 (Prince George) et al.***, [1978 CanLII 12 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1mkbw){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Arnold v. Teno***, [1978 CanLII 2 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1mkb7){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Keizer v. Hanna and Buch***, [1978 CanLII 28 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1tx4l){:target=" \_blank"}

## Part 1 - Topic 1: Remoteness of Damages

The tests for **remoteness** are **legal tests**: they are a sort of safety valve for courts to address their concerns about **excessive tort liability** (recalling Lord Buckmaster’s words in ***Donoghue***, and the Supreme Court of Canada’s “**spectre of indeterminate liability**.”) As legal tests, they are **not for a jury to consider**, and an appeal court can overturn a trial judge’s decision on a question of remoteness.

The original test was **directness**. The new test applies **foreseeability**. 

The old directness test (**no longer the law in Canada**)

The case of ***Re Polemis & Furness Withy & Co.***, [1921] 3 K.B. 560 (C.A.) (at p 99, note 213) established “directness” as the test for remoteness. 

> In order to recover, a plaintiff had to show that the loss was a direct consequence of the defendant’s negligent act. If the plaintiff’s loss was a result of a logically connected sequence of events that flowed from the defendant’s negligent act (or omission), with no intervening causes, then the damages were not too remote. 

This test tended to favour plaintiffs, but not always. Sometimes foreseeable harm can occur in indirect ways, failing the “directness” test, as the court notes in ***Overseas Tankship (U.K.) Ltd. v. Morts Dock and Engineering Co. Ltd., The Wagon Mound (No. 1)***, [1961] A.C. 388 (P.C.). (at p 100, note 214 – “***Wagon Mound 1***”). In other situations, test could be difficult to apply, due to **difficulties in identifying the exact chain of events**. A large part of the problem was that the test itself was never clearly defined.

## Topic 2: The Reasonable Foreseeability Rule

**The foreseeability test**

A series of decisions of England’s top court, decided in 1961, 1963, and 1966, replaced it with a test of **foreseeability**.

The first case is ***Wagon Mound 1***, noted above. This Australian case is the one that formally overturned ***Polemis***. It was a 1961 decision of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (“JCPC”), at the time the top appeal court for Australia. **This decision changed the test from directness to foreseeability**. 

The question now was:

> whether the plaintiff’s loss was a **foreseeable consequence** of the defendant’s negligence.

In ***Wagon Mound 1***, ... the Court held that **foreseeability** is a better test, and on the facts found that it was not foreseeable that the oil would catch fire and severely damage the wharf. The defendants (although negligent) were not liable.

The ***Wagon Mound 1*** has, however, generally been interpreted as requiring that the damage be foreseeable as to a probability, drawing on this phrase:

> a [person] must be considered to be responsible for the **probable consequences** of [that person’s] act.

In other words, if it was reasonably foreseeable that the damage would probably result (reasonable probability), then the damage is not too remote and compensable. 

***Wagon Mound 1***’s version of the foreseeability test seems to favour defendants, it is harder for a plaintiff to establish that a loss is foreseeable as to a probability, than to prove it is a direct consequence of the negligence.

However, other cases suggest a lower threshold and as we shall see **Canadian cases since the 1960s may not require a plaintiff to prove that the consequences were probable**.

**Modifications to the foreseeability test: “retreats” from its stricter rule**

The foreseeability test has been modified over the years. The modifications to the ***Wagon Mound 1*** test, sometimes called “retreats” from its apparent difficulty for plaintiffs, help the plaintiff establish liability. In other words they **expand liability**.

***<u>Retreat 1: Type of damage - Hugues</u>***

The first qualification to the test came only two years later, in ***Hughes v Lord Advocate [1963]***, A.C. 837 (H.L.) (at p 101, note 215). 

The House of Lords held that the **exact cause of an injury need not be foreseeable**, that is the exact sequence of events leading to it, as long as the type (or kind) of injury is foreseeable. It also held, importantly, that the **extent of the injury is not important either**, as long as it is a foreseeable kind.

Although the judges on the House of Lords are the same as those who sat on the JCPC, its decisions are formally binding only in the U.K. The ***Hughes*** case has, however, been adopted in Canada, see ***School Division of Assiniboine South, No. 3 v. Greater Winnipeg Gas Company Limited***, [1971 CanLII 959 (MB CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/gbqhj){:target=" \_blank"}, p 102 of text (note 219) , which was affirmed by the Supreme Court of Canada in 1973 when an appeal was dismissed. Considering this test you may find that it is ultimately quite subjective.

***<u>Retreat 2: Possibility of damage? – Wagon Mound 2</u>***

The same fire that was the basis of The ***Wagon Mound 1*** was also the basis of a second action. In ***Overseas Tankship (U.K.) Ltd . v. Miller Steamship Co. Pty. Ltd., The Wagon Mound (No. 2)***, [1967] 1 A.C. 617 (P.C.) [“***Wagon Mound 2***”], a 1966 decision of the JCPC (reported in 1967), Court found that the loss by fire was not too remote: i.e., in this case it was foreseeable. 

In this trial, there was evidence from the engineers who were doing the welding. They admitted that they foresaw some risk of furnace oil igniting, even when spread on open water. **It seemed unlikely to them, but possible.**

While some of the reasoning in this case is not all that clear, later cases interpreted it as changing the test from foreseeability as to a **probability** to foreseeability as to a **possibility**: i.e., a plaintiff need only show that it was reasonably foreseeable that the injury could possibly result. 

Canadian courts however do not set the threshold as low as a mere “possibility.” In ***Mustapha v. Culligan of Canada Ltd.***, [2008 SCC 27](https://canlii.ca/t/1wz6f){:target=" \_blank"}, at para 13, [see p 102, note 220] the Supreme Court of Canada reinterpreted ***Wagon Mound 2*** and confirmed that **the risk needs to be more than a mere possibility**: likely closer to a probability. However, that case, and most other Canadian cases, follow the ***Hughes*** case in focusing on the **kind of harm**, **rather than the specific series of events leading to the harm**.

## Topic 3: Special Remoteness Issues

**Thin skull** rule, as known as the “eggshell skull” rule, means that the tortfeasor takes the victim the tortfeasor gets, no matter how vulnerable. 

However, under the thin skull rule, for the defendant to be liable, there must be **proximate cause for the initial injury**. It is only the consequential injury that need not be proximate. 

The wrinkle that the longstanding thin skull rule adds to the ***Hughes*** rule is that, under thin skull, the **consequential injury does not** need to be the **same type** of injury as the initial injury, and the type of consequential injury need not be **foreseeable**.

The thin skull rule has been around for a long time. The question that came up after Wagon Mound 1 was whether that case had made the rule outdated. ***Smith v Leech Brain & Co.***, [1962] 2 Q.B. 405 (C.A.), a 1961 English decision (at p 105, note 226) answered this question: No. 

**A note on *Mustapha* and psychiatric harm**

The courts have, however, taken a seemingly opposite approach when it comes to “mere” psychiatric damage, or nervous shock, in the absence of physical damage. 

***Mustapha*** is a leading case on this type of injury. In ***Mustapha***, the Supreme Court confirmed the remoteness test of reasonable foreseeability enunciated in ***Wagon Mound 1*** and ***Hughes***, but added that in cases of mental injury the test must be considered in light of a person with “**ordinary fortitude**”. 

In addition, the Court stated that, to be compensable, the injury must amount to a “**recognizable psychiatric illness**”. 

***<u>Intervening Acts</u>***

“Intervening acts” (or intervening causes) refer to situations in which a defendant is negligent and subsequently a second cause intervenes resulting in a different loss, or aggravating the loss that the defendant’s negligence causes. 

The issue is whether the intervening act breaks the chain of causation stemming from the defendant’s negligence, thus relieving the defendant of liability for the loss (i.e., the loss would be too “remote”), or whether the chain of causation is not broken, leaving the defendant responsible for the consequences of the intervening act as well. The “**legally operative** intervening act” (see text p 106) is sometimes called a *novus actus* interveniens.

The **foreseeability test** is still used in some cases. However, the modern rule is usually the “**within the scope of the risk**” test, which can be **broader** than mere foreseeability:

> The second cause and the resultant damage must be within the scope of the risk of the first negligent act before the defendant will be liable.
In other words, **both the second cause and injury must fall within the chain of causation from the first injury**.

When, however, an intervening act is sufficient to “break the chain of causation” (i.e., it is not within the scope of the risk), that act is a *novus actus* interveniens: a new, intervening act. In these circumstances, the original tortfeasor will not be liable for the resulting loss. **It is only in rare cases that *novus actus* interveniens will be applied to completely exonerate the original tortfeasor.**

An example of a case in which an intervening negligent act did break the chain of causation was in ***Bradford et al. v. Kanellos et al.***, [1973 CanLII 1285 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/gwggw){:target=" \_blank"}, discussed in the text (at pp 107-108, note 228). 

***<u>Intervening medical error</u>***

There are special considerations when the tortfeasor is a physician. 

The text (at 108, note 231) refers to ***Price v. Milawski et al.***, [1977 CanLII 1400 (ON CA)](https://canlii.ca/t/g12l8){:target=" \_blank"}, where a second doctor’s negligence compounded the effects of the first doctor’s negligence. The Court applied the **foreseeability test** in this case, stating that where the subsequent negligence and consequent damage were reasonably foreseeable as a possible result of the original negligence, then the first doctor would be liable for all damage including from the time of the second doctor’s intervention forward. The second doctor was also liable from the point of his intervention forward. As such, both doctors were **jointly and severally liable** for this **subsequent damage**.

## Topic 4: Introduction to Remedies

Note that the words “damages” and “remedies” are sometimes used interchangeably although it’s more accurate to say that **a remedy is an “award of damages.”**

In this module we look at the **purpose of remedies**, and see the **different types of remedies** available to a plaintiff. We will focus on personal injury cases, and assume that all the other elements are proved, and the defendant is liable for the plaintiff’s losses. 

The text (at pp 124-140) in particular does a thorough job covering remedies for personal injury and fatal accidents (see also Note 272 for optional supplementary readings). 

**General Principles and Types of Remedies**

One way to classify damages (i.e. remedies, although in this context damages is term more commonly used) is according to the **function they serve**. According to this **classification**, tort damages can belong to one of several categories:

- **Nominal damages:** not available in negligence actions. Nominal damages are awarded for claims that are “**actionable without proof of loss**” (e.g., trespass, an intentional tort we cover in a subsequent Module). Although no substantial damage has been sustained, a nominal award may be made as **vindication** for the plaintiff’s rights being violated.
- **Compensatory damages:** almost **always** awarded in successful negligence actions. The purpose of compensatory damages is to place the plaintiff in the position the plaintiff would have been if the tort had not occurred. We will focus on this type of damage in this Module.
- **Punitive damages:** **rarely** awarded in negligence claims. Punitive damages are over and above compensatory damages. They punish the defendant for the wrongful behaviour. The plaintiff must show conduct on the part of the defendant that is malicious, outrageous, vicious, etc.
- A fourth category of damages is also available, called **aggravated damages**. This category of remedy is actually **a subset of compensatory damages**, but is only available in special cases.

## Topic 5: Personal Injury



