---
layout: post
title: L503 Module 8
date: 2026-03-21
draft: false
categories:
  - Law
tags:
  - LAW_V 503E E_99C 2025W2 Tort Law - Tort Law
  - Module 8
---

# strict liability torts and nuisance 

## Overview

Nuisance ("noo-sns") is itself **a tort of strict liability** but since it has its own distinct history as a tort its generally described separately, rather than as a category under the “strict liability” heading.

We will first look at four specific areas of strict liability. 

- The first is the rule in ***Rylands v Fletcher***, [(1868) LR 3 HL 330](https://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKHL/1868/1.html){:target=" \_blank"} also known as “**dangerous substances liability**.” That kind of claim is closely linked to nuisance: most cases are about something escaping from the defendant’s land onto the plaintiff’s land, causing damage. 
- We then turn to **liability for animals**: wild animals, domestic animals, and cattle. For each there is a distinct rule, although for each the principle is similar to that in ***Rylands***: **if your animal escapes your control and harms someone, you may be liable even if you took reasonable care.** 
- Finally under the strict liability torts category we look at a distinct category of strict liability: **vicarious liability of employers** for the torts (**intentional or unintentional**) of their employees.
- We’ll then look at the **tort of nuisance**: the area of law that deals with **an interference with a person’s legal rights to enjoy land**, which results in some kind of damage, inconvenience or annoyance to that person. **Since its a strict liability tort, fault is not required.** 

!!! note "Readings"

    - Philip H Osborne, *The Law of Torts*, 6th ed. (Toronto: Irwin Law, 2020), **pp 361-426**.
    - ***Rylands v Fletcher***, [(1868) LR 3 HL 330](https://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKHL/1868/1.html){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Cowles v. Balac***, [2005 CanLII 2038 (ON SC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1jp6b){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Bazley v. Curry***, [1999 CanLII 692 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fqlw){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Blackwater v. Plint***, [2005 SCC 58](https://canlii.ca/t/1lsvn){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Jacobi v. Griffiths***, [1999 CanLII 693 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fqlp){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Antrim Truck Centre Ltd. v. Ontario (Transportation)***, [2013 SCC 13](https://canlii.ca/t/fwdn1){:target=" \_blank"}
    - ***Jones v. Shafer***, [1948 CanLII 32 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/22tmp){:target=" \_blank"}

## Topic 1: The *Rylands v Fletcher* rule

Read ***Rylands v Fletcher*** (1868) referenced in the text.

Much of tort law is based on the fault of the defendant. As we learned that is a fundamental principle of **negligence law**: the plaintiff must prove that the defendant’s acts fell below a reasonable standard of care. For **intentional torts**, as we also saw, intent to do the wrongful act on the part of the defendant is required. 

**Strict liability** is an area of tort law in which a defendant may be liable even in the absence of fault. **The fact that the act occurred and damage resulted is sufficient for liability.** It does not matter that the defendant may have been acting reasonably. In this section, we look at the rules of a type of strict liability related to land use: the ***Rylands* rule**.

***Rylands v Fletcher*: The Rule**

For the purposes of the ***Rylands*** rule, **dangerous substances** can be anything from water, to gas, to chemicals, etc. When a substance escapes from one property onto another, causing damage, the party from whose property the substance escaped will be strictly liable. 

In ***Rylands***, **Blackburn J** found a basis of claim analogous to nuisance, stating:

> We think that the true rule of law is, that the person who for his own purposes brings on his lands and collects and keeps there anything likely to do mischief if it escapes, must keep it in at his peril, and, if he does not do so, is *prima facie* **answerable for all the damage which is the natural consequence of its escape**.

**Blackburn** restated his test a few lines later, stating that land users are liable if they bring “something on [their] property which was **not naturally there**, ... which [the landowner] knows to be mischievous if it gets on [a] neighbour’s” land.

The House of Lords concurred fully with Blackburn J. **Lord Cairns**, whose words are the ones most often cited as the ***Rylands*** rule, said:

> [I]f the defendants, not stopping at the natural use of their close [land], ... use it for any purpose which I may term a non-natural use [and] introduc[e] upon [it anything that] in [the land’s] natural condition was not in or upon it, [e.g., collecting water in a reservoir, whether the water is from other lands or from that land] ... and if in consequence of their doing so ... the water [or other thing] came to escape ... into the [land]of the plaintiff,” they’re liable.

**Lord Cranworth** also endorsed Blackburn, but also had a go at the test:

> If a person brings, or accumulates, on his land anything which if it should escape, may cause damage to his neighbour, he does so at his peril” (i.e., that person is liable).

The case law since ***Rylands*** has interpreted the ***Rylands*** rule as having three elements:

- **Non-natural use of land** (including but not limited to bringing something onto the land that was not there)
- **Escape of the substance** produced by this non-natural use
- **Damage** to the plaintiff’s person or property, outside the defendant’s land

Where the case law has been inconsistent is in the definition of “**non-natural use**.” Some courts take **a liberal view**, and treat this as being the storage of some dangerous substance on the land, something that could cause harm if it escapes, or of some “ultra hazardous activity.” Their view is liberal for plaintiffs: it creates liability in a greater number of cases. Others have taken **a narrower view**, focusing on what amounts to a “natural” use of land. This view typically favours defendants.

**Non-natural use**

In ***Rylands v Fletcher***, the reservoir on the property was found to be a non-natural use of that land, so liability attached to the defendant. 

Subsequent cases suggest that whether a use is natural or non-natural will depend on whether the use is “special,” “abnormal,” “extraordinary,” or “unsuitable” given the location (the narrow view); or **whether the use increases the risk of danger to others** (the broader, more liberal view). 

For instance, in the often cited ***Rickards v Lothian***, [[1913] UKPC 1, [1913] AC 283](https://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKPC/1913/1.html){:target=" \_blank"}, the law lords on the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (it was an Australian case) denied liability on two grounds. First, the defence of “deliberate act by a third party” applied here. Second, the **lavatory did not qualify as a non-natural use**. On the latter point, **Lord Moulton** said:

It is not every case [to which ***Rylands*** applies]. It must be some special use bringing with it **increased danger** to others, and must not merely be the ordinary use of the land or such a use as is proper for the general benefit of the community. ... [W]here a person is using his land in the **ordinary way** and damage happens to the adjoining property without any ... negligence on his part, no liability attaches to him.

Those “danger” remarks are what lead some lawyers, and courts, to argue that the ***Rylands*** tort is really **about dangerous materials or activities**. 

***Smith v. Inco Limited***, [2011 ONCA 628](https://canlii.ca/t/fnc0x){:target=" \_blank"} expressly **rejected the more liberal approach** to ***Rylands*** that some judges and academics have taken. The Ontario Court of Appeal emphasized that “non-natural use” means a use that is not ordinary for that particular area.The top court in Ontario has come down **firmly on the narrow interpretation of “non-natural use,”** and its decision stands as the law, at least in Ontario. It remains to be seen what other provinces do.

**Escape**

Escape of the substance is also an essential element to prove under ***Rylands v Fletcher***. The cases are more consistent in requiring an escape. The substance must actually leave the defendant’s property before causing the loss. 

This was confirmed in the case of ***Read v J Lyons & Co Ltd***，[[1946] UKHL 2, [1947] AC 156](https://www.bailii.org/cgi-bin/format.cgi?doc=/uk/cases/UKHL/1946/2.html){:target=" \_blank"}. ...the plaintiff's action was dismissed, because the explosion from the shells had not “escaped” from the defendant's premises.

**Damage**

In ***Rylands*** claims, the plaintiff must have suffered some kind of **actual property damage or personal injury**. These claims are **unlike nuisance claims**, where recovery may be based on **pure economic loss** or **simple injury to senses or nerves**.

**Defences**

All of the following defences to ***Rylands*** claims are **complete defences**, with the **onus on the defendant** to prove. In other words, if a plaintiff has successfully proved the elements of the strict liability claim, the defendant then would have to prove that one of the defences applies. If the defendant does so, the defendant is not liable at all. 

The defences are:

- Consent of plaintiff
- Mutual Benefit
- Default of plaintiff
- **Act of Third Party** (i.e. stranger) and **Act of God**
- Legislative authority

With regard to the last defence, legislative authority, this defence is available to public authorities exercising their statutory duties and powers. The defence will apply if the damage was the inevitable result of exercising the statutory authority: i.e., there were **no other alternative methods to carry out that authority that would not produce the damage**.

Public authorities may also be exempt from strict liability if there is **an explicit statutory immunity**. In B.C., several statutes grant immunity to public bodies against claims in nuisance or the rule in ***Rylands***. For example, the *Vancouver Charter*, [SBC 1953, c55, s 294(9)](https://www.bclaws.gov.bc.ca/civix/document/id/complete/statreg/vanch_00){:target=" \_blank"} and the *Local Government Act*, [RSBC 2015, c 51, s 288](https://www.bclaws.gov.bc.ca/civix/document/id/complete/statreg/r15001_00){:target=" \_blank"} specifically immunize municipalities from nuisance or ***Rylands*** claims for any damage arising from the escape of substances due to breakdown or malfunction of **sewer systems, water or drainage systems, or dykes and roads**.

**A note on Fire**

The text treats Fire as a separate entry at pp 375-376. The relevance of escape of fire is, as the text points out, inconsequential in Canada. **Fires falls under various heads of tort liability**. 

## Topic 2: The Scienter Action (Strict liability for animals)

**Scienter** is a legal term that refers to **the intent or knowledge of wrongdoing**. It is a mental state that indicates that a person acted with knowledge of the illegality or with reckless disregard for the truth.

Please read the following case(s) referenced in the text: ***Cowles v. Balac***, [2005 CanLII 2038 (ON SC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1jp6b){:target=" \_blank"}

As the text notes at p 378, the scienter action is the key element in a tort involving dangerous animals and harms to persons. The central issue here is the **knowledge by the defendant of the animal’s dangerous nature**. At common law, this was known as scienter, and an action could be brought if damage resulted from that animal’s known propensity for harm. The defendant would be the person who was in possession or control of the animal at the time, **the defendant does not need to be the owner**.

Animals are classified into two types:

**(1) Wild animals (*ferae naturae* animals)**

The owner of a wild animal (e.g., in a zoo, but also a wild animal kept as a pet) will be strictly liable for any damage caused by the animal, if the owner has lost control or custody of the animal. As noted in the text, courts have held that **there must be lack of control by the keeper of the animal for strict liability to apply**. There is no requirement that the animal actually escape, but the animal must not be under the keeper’s control at the time the damage occurs. (**If the animal was in the owner’s control, the claim would be for negligence.**)

***Cowles v Balac*** involved two plaintiffs who were injured when they were attacked by Bengal tigers while driving through an “African safari” zoo in Ontario (p 378, note 38). The trial and appeal courts found that strict liability applied, since the animals were allowed to roam free, and were not under the zoo’s control.

**(2) Domestic animals (*mansuetae naturae* animals)**

For domesticated animals, such as dogs, cats, birds, cows, sheep, and horses, **strict liability depends on whether the animal has a dangerous propensity and the owner was aware of that propensity** (i.e. there is scienter comes into play). 

To break it down, liability for domestic animals will be strict if:

- The animal caused the **injury**
- The animal had manifested **a vicious or mischievous propensity** to cause (or attempt) this type of harm
- The owner (or controller of the animal) **knew of the animal’s propensity**

Claims for harm by domestic animals are often **made in both negligence and strict liability**, in case the case fails to meet the test for one.

Finally, the **defences** for scienter actions are **similar** to those above for actions under the ***Rylands*** rule. The **plaintiff bears the onus of proving both the animal’s propensity and the owner or controller’s awareness of it**. 

## Topic 3: Cattle Trespass

At common law, strict liability may also apply where **cattle has strayed onto another’s land, causing damage**. The **owner** of cattle or other domestic animals has the responsibility to keep the animals under control (i.e. not wandering “at large”). If the animal subsequently causes personal injury or damage to another’s property (e.g., destroys crops), that **property owner has an action in cattle trespass**.

In B.C. the *Livestock Act*, [[RSBC 1996] CHAPTER 270](https://www.bclaws.gov.bc.ca/civix/document/id/complete/statreg/96270_01){:target=" \_blank"} modified the common law somewhat. It allows the owner of certain types of animals (**cattle**, **horses**, **sheep**, **swine**, etc.) to **defend** against liability if the owner took **reasonable care** to ensure that the animal was not “at large”. 

**For animals not mentioned in the *Act*, the common law rule of strict liability applies.**

Also, note that when it comes to livestock straying onto **highways**, liability is only founded in **negligence** and not strict liability. So if a cow suddenly strays onto a highway, and you cannot help but swerve your car to avoid it, and you crash into a telephone pole, you could only claim in negligence. 

The defences for cattle trespass are very similar to those of scienter actions. Note the text’s brief reference to “**distress damage feasant**” (p 382). It’s essentially a **self-help remedy** that **lets a plaintiff seize and hold cattle as security for any damage** they may have caused while straying.

## Topic 4: Vicarious Liability

Please read the following case(s) referenced in the text:

- ***Bazley v. Curry***, [1999 CanLII 692 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fqlw){:target=" \_blank"}
- ***Blackwater v. Plint***, [2005 SCC 58](https://canlii.ca/t/1lsvn){:target=" \_blank"}
- ***Jacobi v. Griffiths***, [1999 CanLII 693 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fqlp){:target=" \_blank"}

Vicarious liability involves the **liability of one party for the fault of another**, due to the **special relationship** between them.

The most litigated area of vicarious liability is that involving the **employer-employee relationship**. The employer may be held strictly liable for the actions of its employee (whether negligent or intentional), even though the employer is not at fault. Courts impose vicarious liability because the employer is seen to have control over the activities of the employee.

Two conditions must be met:

- an employer-employee **relationship** must be established, and
- the employee must have committed the tort **“in the course of” employment**.

**Employer-Employee vs. Independent Contractor**

***671122 Ontario Ltd. v. Sagaz Industries Canada Inc.***, [2001 SCC 59](https://canlii.ca/t/51z6){:target=" \_blank"} focused on the employer-employee relationship (p 382, note 55). The Supreme Court of Canada concluded that the person who committed the wrongdoing was not an employee, but rather an independent contractor, because of the **“lack of control” element**. There were six other factors that the Supreme Court also considered when determining that the relationship was not one of employer-employee (see *ibid*, note 56).

The Supreme Court has also recently recognized that **an employee may be employed by more than one entity**. 

**In the course of employment**

Another difficult area can be determining whether conduct by the employee was in the course of employment, i.e., has been **authorized** or **endorsed** by the employer. If the conduct is unauthorized, then the employee has not acted in the scope of his employment and the employer will not be liable. **If, however, the conduct was authorized, vicarious liability will be imposed even if the conduct was done in an unauthorized manner.**

The two leading cases here are ***Bazley v Curry*** and ***Jacobi v Griffiths***. The issue in both cases was whether the organizations that hired the employees were vicariously liable for the employees' misconduct.

The main consideration of whether vicarious liability will attach to an employer is whether the employee’s tortious act fell “**within the ambit of the risk**” that the employer’s **enterprise created or exacerbated**. In other words, was there **a strong connection** between what the employer was asking the employee to do and the wrongful act. 

The court summarized the test in ***Bazley***:

> In summary, the test for vicarious liability for an employee’s [wrongful act] should focus on whether the employer’s enterprise and empowerment of the employee **materially increased the risk** of the ... harm. [at para 46].

In ***Bazley***, the Supreme Court found the employer was found vicariously liable for the sexual assaults, since it had significantly increased the risk of harm to the plaintiff by allowing the employee long periods of unsupervised time with his victims in intimate situations (e.g., bathing). **By contrast**, no vicarious liability was imposed on the employer in ***Jacobi***, as the employer's “enterprise” was fostering group recreational activities, mostly held in public, outdoor spaces. The employee had subverted those public activities to isolate victims from the group.

### Practice Question

!!! danger "Quiz"

    1. All of the cases below, which we've reviewed, deal with vicarious liability. Select the case that demonstrates the potential of vicarious liability to force multiple entities to deal with issues of liability apportionment and settling lawsuits.
        - [ ] *Bazley v Curry*
        - [x] *Blackwater v Plint*
        - [ ] *671122 Ontario Ltd v Sagaz Industries Canada Inc.*
        - [ ] *Jacobi v Griffiths*
    > ***Blackwater*** dealt with vicarious liability and apportioning civil liability for sexual assaults on students by employees of the school and church. The multiple entities operating Indian Residential Schools, which in that case was the Government of Canada and the United Church of Canada, were both ultimately found vicariously liable by the Supreme Court of Canada. ***Blackwater*** was instrumental in deciding the issue of church liability and potential financial exposure to further lawsuits. It provided an impetus for the Canadian government to begin negotiations on settling outstanding claims of abuse at Indian Residential Schools.

## Topic 5: Private Nuisance

Please read the following case(s) referenced in the text: ***Antrim Truck Centre Ltd. v. Ontario (Transportation)***, [2013 SCC 13](https://canlii.ca/t/fwdn1){:target=" \_blank"}

The law of nuisance encompasses two categories: **private nuisance** and **public nuisance**. 

Although the same set of facts may support both a “private claim in public nuisance” and a “private nuisance” claim, the main difference between them is that 

- private nuisance claims are rooted in the **plaintiff’s use of the plaintiff’s land**: the lawsuit is focused on activities by others (usually nearby land occupiers) that interfere with that use. 
- Public nuisance is about the **plaintiff’s (or general public’s) use of public lands**, and the defendant’s interference with those uses.

Occupiers of private land (whether landowners or not) are entitled to “quiet enjoyment” of their land (including buildings on it). When the defendant has in some way hampered that enjoyment to an unreasonable degree, the occupier has a civil remedy in private nuisance.

The definition of a private nuisance in the case law has been clear: **an unreasonable and substantial interference with the occupier’s reasonable use and enjoyment of land.** People are expected to tolerate a certain amount of interference, so nuisance is only where the interference is more than what an ordinary person would tolerate. Courts refer to this as the “give and take”, “live and let live” approach.

Often private nuisance cases involve adjoining landowners/occupiers, but are not limited to that. **Examples of private nuisance cases** include (parenthetical references to page number and notes from the text):

- **Removal of sub-surface substances**, causing subsidence (e.g., water: ***Pugliese v Canada (National Capital Commission)*** (1977), 17 O.R. (2d) 129 (C.A.) (see p 407, note 24)
- **Emission of foul odours** (***Appleby v Erie Tobacco*** (1910), 22 O.L.R. 533 (C.A.), see p 403, note 12 for descriptions of the odours.)
- **Harassing phone calls** (***Motherwell v Motherwell*** (1976), 1 A.R. 47 (S.C.A.D), see p 408, note 26)
- **Interference with t.v. reception** (***Nor-Video Service v Ontario Hydro*** (1978), 19 O.R. (2d) 107 (H.C.J.), see p 409, note 34)
- **Reduction in customer traffic (lost revenue)** (***Antrim Truck Centre Ltd v Ontario Transportation***, see pp 400-401, note 4 – required case reading).

There are two bases on which a nuisance claim can be brought.

- First, if an occupier has suffered **substantial material, physical damage** as a result of the interference, nuisance will generally be easy to establish. The Ontario case of ***Smith v Inco Limited***, cited above, held that material damage must be “substantial, actual and readily ascertainable.” (see p 401 note 7),
- Second, a nuisance action may be brought where the damage is **simply personal inconvenience or injury to the occupier’s “senses or nerves”**, also known as **amenity nuisance** (i.e. “interference with the health, comfort or convenience of the occupier”, as in Antrim Truck). **No physical damage is required**, but the interference must pass **a preliminary threshold test of being substantial, rather than trivial**.

In all cases, nuisance depends on the **reasonableness of the interference**, which typically takes into account these **factors**, as set out in ***Tock v. St. John's Metropolitan Area Board***, [1989 CanLII 15 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1ft1m){:target=" \_blank"} when the Supreme Court found private nuisance liability for a basement flooding (p 402, note 10):

- Nature, severity and duration of interference
- Character of the neighbourhood
- Utility of the defendant’s conduct
- Whether plaintiff displayed abnormal sensitivity

Note the overlap with the factors for public nuisance, as set out in ***Ryan v. Victoria (City)***, [1999 CanLII 706 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fqpf){:target=" \_blank"} which we’ll discuss further below in the context of defences (p 424, note 76). 

**The first and last factors are more specific to private nuisance than to public.** Regarding the first factor: until the 20th century, courts required the interference to be a continuing one. There was no magic number of days or weeks required, but it could not be a one-time event.

With respect to the last factor, “sensitivity,” the court will consider whether the plaintiff’s use of the property was an “abnormal use” or the plaintiff’s reaction to the interference was “abnormally sensitive”. If a plaintiff is being unusually sensitive, or it is an unusual use of land that the defendant has interfered with, then the nuisance action fails. 

***Antrim Truck***

The Supreme Court of Canada’s decision in ***Tock*** is still an important one for nuisance law, since courts consistently refer to its concise list of factors for assessing the reasonableness of an interference. ***Antrim Truck*** is, however, now the **leading case in Canada on the basic principles of private nuisance**. 

The Supreme Court took the case as a chance to clarify the tests for private nuisance. The decision divides into three main questions:

- **Elements** of private nuisance (at paras 19-24 of the decision);
- How to assess “**reasonableness**”; and
- Does the unreasonableness test **apply in cases of physical or material damage**? 

**Basic elements of nuisance: the two-part approach (and the need for flexibility)**

First, the Supreme Court adopts a **two-step approach** to private nuisance claims:

> the interference with the owner’s [or occupier’s] use or enjoyment of land must be both **substantial** and **unreasonable**. A substantial interference ... is one that is non-trivial. Where this threshold is met, the inquiry proceeds to the reasonableness analysis, which is the balancing act informed by the ***Tock*** factors above.

The value of the two-step approach is debatable, the Court admits, and may over-complicate some cases. But the “threshold requirement” of substantial harm or interference will **screen out weak claims**. 

The definition of substantial harm is not a strict, objective test. Nor is the reasonableness analysis necessarily a rigid one. Courts should take into account factors such as those set out in ***Tock***, but not rigidly follow the factors as if they are a checklist for which each box must be ticked in every case.

**Assessing reasonableness: the balancing act and the factors to consider**

At paras 25-26, the Supreme Court sets out the basic test, in language consistent with that of the other cases including ***Smith***, ”balance the gravity of the harm against the utility of the defendant’s conduct in all the circumstances”.

The Court then speaks of the **factors** that aid in the analysis of this balancing act. The three typical ones are familiar from ***Tock***: **severity** of the interference; **character** of the neighbourhood; and **sensitivity** of the plaintiff. 

In the next two paragraphs the Court notes at least one other factor that is relevant to the “**utility of the defendant’s conduct**” side of the scale. That factor is an assessment of the way the defendant carried out its activity: specifically, **did the defendant have alternative means of carrying out its activity, which would interfere less**?

The Supreme Court also explores the weight to be given to the **social utility** of the defendant’s actions. **When the defendant is the government, the social utility will be high.** They look more generally at the line between acceptable

> ’give and take’ [between property users that is] expected of everyone and, on the other [hand], interferences that impose a disproportionate burden on individuals.

Here you see how nuisance does indeed put the **emphasis** on the **reasonableness of what the plaintiff has had to put up with, not on the reasonableness or value of what the defendant is doing**. An economist would say that nuisance forces property users, including the government, to take account of **“external” costs** of their activities, i.e., the harms to neighbours that cross the “give and take” line.

**Is a reasonableness analysis necessary for both amenity claims and material harm?**

The short answer here is **yes**. 

***Tock*** suggests that the factors apply to all claims, while acknowledging that they are more important in **amenity cases**. ***Antrim Truck*** affirms that courts should consider the factors in cases of **material harm** too.

However, keep in mind that the Supreme Court is definitely **not calling** on courts to rigidly **go step by step** through every factor that a previous court has ever suggested (for nuisance or for any other legal test).

In ***Antrim Truck***, the Ontario Municipal Board had found a private nuisance, based on its view of the reasonableness balancing act. In doing so, it did not explicitly go through every factor from ***Tock***. The Supreme Court of Canada held that the Board’s “reasonableness analysis” was, in summary, reasonable: thoughtful and appropriate to the case. 

## Topic 6: Public Nuisance

Please read the following case(s) referenced in the text: ***Jones v. Shafer***, [1948 CanLII 32 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/22tmp){:target=" \_blank"}

Public nuisance is where the rights of the **general public** or **particular group** of people have been unreasonably interfered with. The interests that are affected can include **public health, safety, morals, comfort, or convenience**. They don’t necessarily involve interests in **land** (**unlike private nuisance**).

Situations that give rise to public nuisance are vast and diverse. Typical examples include **unreasonable noise**, or where **toxic substances**, such as pollution, are released **into the air or waterways**. The public as a whole can be affected by such disturbances, so they constitute a public nuisance. However, public nuisance can also include some not so common scenarios. For example:

- **disreputable** persons or businesses in the neighbourhood (prostitutes and bawdy houses; drug dealers; etc.)
- **protesters** (e.g., blocking access to or use of a public space; or just making noise)
- **dangerous** structures on or near public roads or highways (Mint is an example)

In ***Ryan v. Victoria (City)***, [1999 CanLII 706 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fqpf){:target=" \_blank"}, noted above, Major J set out a helpful definition of public nuisance. The interference has to be unreasonable, taking into consideration the following:

- **Inconvenience** caused by the defendant’s activity
- **Difficulty** involved in lessening or avoiding the activity
- **Social utility** of the activity (its value to public, but also to the defendant)
- **General practice** of others (critical for assessing reasonableness, not in the sense of negligence, but in the sense of what is a reasonable use of land, and what is reasonable for others to put up with)
- **Character of the neighbourhood** (e.g., industrial or quiet residential?)

The **core question is a balancing act**, between the public’s (and individual plaintiff’s) right to protect its interests, on one hand, and the defendant’s right to pursue its interests, on the other. 

This balancing act is true of private nuisance, as well, but in a narrower context: in private nuisance, we focus only on what is reasonable for the plaintiff to put up with., rather than taking the value of the defendant’s activity into account.

In general, the greater the harm to the **public’s use of land**, and the lower the value to society of the defendant’s activity, the more likely it is that there is a public nuisance.

Public nuisances are now mostly offences encompassed by the *Criminal Code* or other statutes (e.g., quasi-criminal or regulatory offences such as environmental protection). 

Because it is the public that is “affronted,” it is usually up to the Crown (criminal action) or the Attorney General on behalf of the people (civil proceedings) to institute proceedings against the responsible party. Thus the general public that is affected by a public nuisance is not able to recover damages in these actions. **The problem may be removed, but there is no compensation for past harm.**

**Private action in public nuisance: general principles**

In some circumstances, an individual may be able to bring a private action in public nuisance against the defendant for damages, where the individual has suffered some **peculiar damage**, separate from the inconvenience sustained by the general public. The plaintiff will have to prove that the **loss suffered was special** to that plaintiff: **different from the damage sustained by the public as a whole.** That is often difficult to do.

***Hickey et al. v. Electric Reduction Co. of Canada, Ltd.***, [1970 CanLII 907 (NL SC)](https://canlii.ca/t/gwg2x){:target=" \_blank"} demonstrates the difficulty (p 423, note 71). The court found that the loss suffered by this plaintiff was no different than that suffered by all fishers, and so the action was dismissed. The court states,

> the general proposition that a peculiar and particular damage, **distinct from that of the general public**, is necessary to sustain an action. 
 
However, the question of “special damage,” a.k.a. “peculiar damage” in public nuisance claims is one of those areas of law that have produced muddled case law, with ambiguous rules. There are two areas of ambiguity. 

- The first is whether the damage must be peculiar in **type** (or kind), or special/peculiar in **degree**. 
- The second is whether you are comparing the plaintiff to other, similar plaintiffs (in the **same group or class** as the plaintiff: e.g., fishers; or retail businesses), so this plaintiff’s injury must stand out in some way from the injury that this group suffered; or whether you compare the individual to the **general public**.

**Private action in public nuisance: personal injury and public thoroughfares**

A **thoroughfare** is a primary passage or way of transport, whether by road on dry land or, by extension, via watercraft or aircraft. Originally, the word referred to a main road or open street which was frequented thoroughly.

Private actions are usually successful in cases of **personal injury or property damage** resulting from the nuisance activity: this obviously satisfies the **special damage test** (damage specific to the plaintiff). And it is generally easier to make out a claim in public nuisance when there is an **interference with a public thoroughfare**, since the blocking of roadways and paths are classic cases of public nuisances, both the kinds of claims that the crown brings to court, and private claims.

Regarding highways: Some more general comments: 

- (1) Highway cases are often **both claims** in **negligence** and, in the alternative, a private claim in **public nuisance**. 
- (2) Although people who block roads and thoroughfares or leave hazards on or near them do run a risk of liability in nuisance, the courts don’t accept that nuisance is automatic. **There has to be something unreasonable about the interference.**

Public nuisance has a different emphasis, though. There is **no need to prove an act of carelessness by the defendant**. You just need to prove that the defendant’s actions, while not necessarily negligent, created a hazard or obstruction or other **interference that is unreasonable for others to put up with**. 

**The unreasonableness aspect here is focused on what is reasonable for other users, not what is reasonable for the defendant to do.**

!!! info ""

    In ***Jones v. Shafer***, [1948 CanLII 32 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/22tmp){:target=" \_blank"}, the driver’s truck broke down at night. He pulled over to the side of the road, and placed lights around the truck. Then he went to arrange repairs. He did not get back until 15 hours later. Some rogue came along during the night and stole the lights. Next came another motorist. Crash. By 4-1, the Supreme Court of Canada rejected the claim of negligence, saying the driver had done what he should. Turning to nuisance, the Court considered other similar cases, and concluded that this driver hadn’t created the nuisance. It was the rogue who had done so.

This reasoning in ***Jones*** suggests that to create a nuisance the **defendant must do something to create the nuisance (hazard) in the first place**. The Supreme Court in ***Jones*** goes out of its way to emphasize that all users of roadways (and other public spaces) have mutual obligations to allow others to use them too. It is **a balancing act**. The majority quotes (at p 178 of decision) this passage from another UK case, ***Herring v. Metropolitan Board of Works***, (1865) 19 C.B. (N.S.) 510:

> As a general rule, all the Queen's subjects have a right to the free and uninterrupted use of a public way: but ... all persons have an equally undoubted right for a proper purpose to impede and obstruct the convenient access of the public through and along the same. Instances of this interruption arise at every moment of the day. Carts and waggons stop at the doors of shops and warehouses for the purpose of loading and unloading goods. Coal-shoots are opened on the public footways for the purpose of letting in necessary supplies of fuel.

The Supreme Court of Canada adds:

> [N]o member of the public has an exclusive right to use the highway: he has merely a right to use it subject to the reasonable user of [i.e. use by] and if that reasonable user causes him to be obstructed he has no legal cause of complaint. 
>
> It was, in my opinion, a reasonable user of the highway on the [defendant] to leave his truck drawn up on the easterly side of the road amply protected by warning lights while he went for the necessary repairs, even if this entailed leaving it there overnight. It cannot, I think, be suggested that in these circumstances if the driver of another vehicle had collided with the standing truck at any time prior to the time at which the flares were stolen he could have recovered in nuisance against this appellant. The truck so protected was not a danger to anyone nor was the use of the highway obstructed, except to the extent that vehicles travelling north would require to draw to the left of the truck in passing.

### Discussion: Module 8 - Topic 6

Please consider the following question. By contrast, the dissenting judge, **Rand J**, takes a more absolute view. He says,

> The highway is primarily for the purpose of passing and repassing; for automobiles it is neither a storage place nor a garage. ... [T]he driver, for instance, could either by himself or by a person in the neighbourhood have kept an indoor watch on the flares and have set up substitute warnings on the roadway when they had disappeared.” You can call this a stricter approach to strict liability, but in fact he is just tipping the balancing act in favour of other users of public space, relative to users who occasionally have to stop due to breakdowns or deliveries (and blurring the line even further between public nuisance and the “creating a danger” category of nonfeasance).

What do you think of his view?

**Defences to nuisance**

Because nuisance is a strict liability tort, it is difficult to defend. The defendant **cannot** argue a **lack of intention** to cause the nuisance. Nor can the defendant argue that the defendant took all **reasonable care** (i.e., was not negligent). 

Some available defences, although rare, include **statutory immunity**, **consent**, **prescription**, **Acts of God** or **intervening acts of a 3rd party**. They mirror somewhat the defences to other strict liability torts that we discussed above, and are covered in the text at pp 411-415. 

<u>Defence of statutory authority</u>

The public authority can say that although it created the nuisance, it was **justified** because it was permitted to do the activity under statute.

The Supreme Court of Canada discussed the defence of statutory authority in ***Tock***. The Court offered **three possible approaches** to when the defence of statutory authority would apply and the text discusses the various differing opinions of the Justices (p 415, note 50). Unfortunately, there was no clear majority on which of the three approaches should be adopted.

As note 50 and pp 415-416 explain, the Supreme Court of Canada revisited the issue in ***Ryan*** and adopted **Sopinka**’s test in ***Tock***. It confirmed the **traditional approach**: 

!!! info ""

    for the defence to apply, the nuisance created must be the **inevitable result of exercising the statutory duty or power**. The defendant must show that there are **no viable alternative** methods that, if used, would have avoided the nuisance. And if there is only one practically feasible method, the defendant must show that it is practically impossible to avoid the nuisance using that method (based on current technology). 

The traditional test was also ultimately applied in ***Susan Heyes Inc. (Hazel & Co.) v. South Coast B.C. Transportation Authority***, [2011 BCCA 77](https://canlii.ca/t/2fsj7){:target=" \_blank"}, mentioned in our text (p 411, note 40) The B.C. Court of Appeal reversed the trial judge’s finding of liability for nuisance, accepted that tunneling was not a viable alternative and that the defence of statutory authority was available to the appellants.

**The onus of proving the defence of statutory authority rests with the defendant.** It is a high standard to meet, and it is often **difficult** for the defendant to prove that 

- (a) there were **no alternate** methods available that would have avoided the nuisance, and 
- (b) it was **practically impossible** to avoid the nuisance using the available method.

**Remedies**

For public nuisance cases, the penalty is **sanctioned** under the *Criminal Code* or relevant statute (usually a fine or imprisonment) or may be an **injunction**. 

In private nuisance cases and private claims in public nuisance, the two remedies that can be sought also commonly include an **injunction** but also includes **damages**. The injunction may be to prevent future harm, to stop the defendant from doing something, or to require the defendant to do something.

Generally speaking, if the injury to the plaintiff is small and can be adequately compensated by a monetary payment, then a court will award of damages. 

If however, there is actual damage that is substantial and continuing, an injunction may be granted instead. As always with injunctions, the court will assess where the **balance of convenience** lies, will the defendant suffer more by the granting of an injunction, or will the plaintiff suffer more by not having an injunction?

Abatement as a self-help remedy (i.e. a victim of a nuisance taking steps on their own to end the nuisance) is generally not looked upon favorably by courts. 

## Module 8 Summary

In this module we’ve covered the basics related to **strict liability torts**. You have learned to apply the rule relating to those torts, in particular the ***Rylands*** rule. 

Like other areas of tort law that we’ve explored, we have seen that the typical situations where strict liability torts apply have evolved with time. 

The basic principles underlying the need for something to escape onto something else, causing strict liability, still applies. 

The rules for dangerous animals and liability have become somewhat murky with the introduction of new pets into domestic situations. 

The area of vicarious liability in particular has evolved and, as we saw with the Residential School example, led to changes to government policy. 

The tort of nuisance has maintained its central premises: in private nuisance, protecting the right of an individual from interference with and ability to enjoy of their land; and in public nuisance protecting the public, through criminal definitions that complement the tort.

## Textbook Summary: pp 361-426.

**Chapter 5 STRICT LIABILITY**

**A. INTRODUCTION**

The distinguishing feature of the strict liability torts is that there is **no need to prove that the defendant was guilty of any wrongful (intentional or negligent) conduct**. In the absence of defences, proof that the defendant caused the plaintiff’s loss in the manner prescribed is sufficient to impose liability. 

The torts of strict liability include the rule in ***Rylands v Fletcher***, liability for fire, the scienter action for damage caused by dangerous animals, and cattle trespass. It is also conventional to include in this list vicarious liability even though it is not a discrete tort. 

The formal decline of the discrete strict liability torts has been matched by a rise in a *de facto* strict liability under the guise of **strict standards of care within the tort of negligence**. 

There is, therefore, a **paradox** in the Canadian law of torts in respect of strict liability. On the one hand, the courts have shown no willingness either to expand existing heads of strict liability or to create new heads of strict liability. On the other hand, there is a willingness, in certain situations, to impose a covert strict liability under the guise of applying traditional negligence principles.

**B. THE RULE IN *RYLANDS v FLETCHER*** 

The litigation in ***Rylands v Fletcher***, [(1868) LR 3 HL 330](https://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKHL/1868/1.html){:target=" \_blank"} gave rise to the most significant rule of strict liability in tort law. 

**(1) Elements of Liability**

To establish liability under the rule in ***Rylands v Fletcher***, the plaintiff must show a non-natural use of land, an escape of something likely to do mischief from the land, and damage.

<u>(a) Non-natural Use of Land</u>

A non-natural use of land is an essential element of strict liability in the rule in ***Rylands v Fletcher***. Today, however, non-natural use has a different meaning from that initially ascribed to it by Lord Cairns. It no longer means artificial, foreign, or not arising in the course of nature. It means **dangerous**, **extraordinary**, **special**, and **of no general benefit to the community**. 

The pivotal case in this development was ***Rickards v Lothian***, [1913] AC 263 (PC) which dealt with the escape of water from a domestic plumbing system. The Court defined a non-natural use of land as

> a special use [of land] bringing with it increased danger to others, and must not merely be the ordinary use of the land or such a use as is proper for the general benefit of the community.

It is now clear, however, that the one consistent factor in determining whether or not a land use is non-natural is the **creation of an increased danger**. 

<u>(b) The Escape of Something Likely to Cause Mischief</u>

The escape of something likely to cause mischief from land controlled by the defendant has always been an essential element of the rule of Rylands v Fletcher. 

There are two components to this element: **mischievous things** and **escape**. The former is largely superfluous now that the concept of non-natural use carries the connotation of special danger. 

Most cases deal with **a single escape** of a harmful element but modern authority suggests that it extends to situations where harm has been caused by **multiple escapes** of elements such as toxic chemicals and refinery emissions.

<u>(c) Damage</u>

The rule in ***Rylands v Fletcher*** is actionable only on proof of harm to the plaintiff. Most of the cases deal with **damage to neighbouring land** but **harm to chattels** is also recoverable. 

There has been little discussion in Canada about the appropriate rule of **remoteness** of damage under the rule in ***Rylands v Fletcher***. ... the decision of the House of Lords in ***Cambridge Water Co v Eastern Counties Leather plc***, [1994] 2 AC 264 (HL) is ... the defendant’s business was a non-natural use of land but there was no liability for the unforeseeable consequences of the escape of chemicals. The adoption of **reasonable foreseeability** as the remoteness rule does, however, further erodes the strength of strict liability and moves the tort another step closer to the tort of negligence.

**(2) Defences**

Some of the defences, including **act of God** and **default of the plaintiff**, were established in the case of ***Rylands v Fletcher***. Others, such as **consent** and the **act of a third person**, seem to have been borrowed from the nineteenth century law of negligence. 

<u>(a) Consent</u>

There is no liability where the plaintiff either **expressly** or **impliedly consented** to the defendant’s non-natural use of land. 

In this context, consent has been interpreted loosely. It appears to be sufficient that the plaintiff **knew of the dangerous use of land and entered or remained in a place of danger**. **Taking possession** of land that is adjacent to a known non-natural land use or **leasing a part of a building** in which the defendant conducts a non-natural use seems to be sufficient to establish the consent of the plaintiff. 

<u>(b) Mutual Benefit</u>

It is well accepted that the **general benefit or utility of the defendant’s land use** is relevant in deciding if the land use is non-natural. 

The Supreme Court has, for example, been unwilling to regard a municipal sewer system as a non-natural use of land. There is **less agreement**, however, on whether or not proof that the plaintiff benefited from the defendant’s land use is an independent defence. 

The more modern view is that **mutual benefit is not an independent defence**. At most it is an evidentiary factor in establishing the defence of consent 

<u>(c) Default of the Plaintiff</u>

No liability arises where the escape is caused by the default of the plaintiff. The defence mirrors the nineteenth century negligence rule that contributory negligence of the plaintiff is a complete bar to an action. Legislation has since introduced apportionment into negligence law, but the drafters of that legislation do not appear to have intended that it apply to strict liability. Consequently, default of the plaintiff continues to be **a complete bar** to liability under the rule in ***Rylands v Fletcher***.

<u>(d) Act of a Stranger and Act of God</u>

These two defences are grouped together because each excludes liability where the escape is caused by a particular kind of **unforeseeable intervening act**. 

Where the escape is caused by the deliberate and unforeseeable act of a person over whom the defendant has **no control**, such as a trespasser, or by a natural event of such intensity that no reasonable person could be expected to foresee it and guard against it, there is no liability under the rule in ***Rylands v Fletcher***.
 
In theory a “no negligence” defence is incompatible with strict liability, the purpose of which is to allocate losses on the basis of cause alone. 

<u>(e) Statutory Authority</u>

In the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the courts were quite protective of statutorily authorized land use. Today, the pendulum is swinging back in favour of plaintiffs and there is a greater willingness to impose liability. 

The current scope of the defence is quite narrow. First, careful consideration must be given to the enabling legislation to determine if the land use is **authorized**. The defendant must then prove that the damage caused was an **inevitable and unavoidable consequence** of the authorized activity. It is not sufficient to show that reasonable care was taken. It must be shown that it was **practically impossible to avoid the damage**. 

**(3) The Rule in *Rylands v Fletcher* and Historic Pollution**

The leading case is ***Smith v. Inco Limited***, [2011 ONCA 628](https://canlii.ca/t/fnc0x){:target=" \_blank"}. The Ontario Court of Appeal reversed the trial judge, holding that the refinery was **not an ultra hazardous activity** and was not, therefore, a non-natural use. 

The court also identified **further stumbling blocks** to the action. 

- It held, first, that even if the defendant’s land use was ultra-hazardous, it would **not be a non-natural use** because it was neither a special, extraordinary, or unusual use of the land nor without incidental benefit to the community. The operation of a refinery in an industrialized area of the city was in the court’s opinion a usual and ordinary operation that did not generate risks any greater than many other industries. 
- Second, the rule in ***Rylands v Fletcher*** applies only to the **unintended escape** of emissions such as those caused by a mishap or misadventure in the course of the defendant’s operation. The emissions at issue were an intended and inevitable consequence of the activity. 
- Third, it was of the opinion that there were compelling reasons to hold that liability is **restricted to foreseeable harm**. This would, in itself, foreclose many claims for historic pollution. 
- Fourth, it was not convinced that the plaintiffs **suffered** the kind of harm they alleged. 
- Finally, the court was of the view that any extension of strict liability should be made by the **legislature**, not by the courts.

**(4) The Rule in *Rylands v Fletcher*, Negligence, and Nuisance**

The rule in ***Rylands v Fletcher***, negligence, and nuisance are not mutually exclusive causes of action. Plaintiffs commonly allege liability under all three heads of liability. 

... The third view is to reduce the scope of the rule in ***Rylands v Fletcher*** by adopting a strict and narrow interpretation of its constituent elements. The decision of the Court of Appeal in ***Smith v Inco Ltd*** is illustrative.

**C. FIRE**

Liability for the escape of fire must now be established on one of the standard heads of tort liability such as the rule in ***Rylands v Fletcher***, negligence, or nuisance. 

**Strict liability** for the escape of fire may now be established under the rule in ***Rylands v Fletcher***. Consideration must, of course, be given as to whether the fire arose in respect of **a non-natural use of land**. Fires for heating, cooking, or other domestic purposes are unlikely to be considered as amounting to a non-natural use. Opinion is divided on the use of fire for agricultural purposes. Liability also extends to fires that arise spontaneously from a land use that qualifies as a dangerous fire hazard, such as the bulk storage of gasoline or propane. 

The **tort of negligence** also imposes a heavy responsibility for damage caused by the escape of fire. Stringent standards of care coupled with the generous use of circumstantial evidence facilitate the imposition of liability on occupiers in respect of fires that are negligently lit or escape because of a lack of continuing vigilance or control. 

There is some degree of **covert strict liability** under the guise of the application of the tort of negligence. An occupier is also held liable for the negligence of his **employees, independent contractors, and guests**. An occupier is even under a duty to take reasonable steps to control or extinguish a fire arising on his land from any source, including **an act of a stranger or an act of God**. 

**D. THE SCIENTER ACTION (LIABILITY FOR HARM CAUSED BY DANGEROUS ANIMALS)** 

**(1) The Elements of Liability**

Under the scienter action, the keepers of dangerous animals are strictly liable for injuries and harm caused by them. The plaintiff must prove not only that the animal was **dangerous** but also that the keeper **knew** that the animal was dangerous. For the purposes of this action, animals are divided into two classes: animals *ferae naturae* and animals *mansuetae naturae*.

Animals *ferae naturae* are those that are considered, by their nature, to be dangerous to people. A keeper is strictly liable even though the injury may not have been of the kind that led the courts to categorize the animal as *ferae naturae*. 

Animals *mansuetae naturae* are by their nature harmless to people and include domesticated farm animals and cats and dogs. A keeper is strictly liable under the scienter action if he was aware of its dangerous nature before it attacked the plaintiff. 

In recent years, some courts now require proof that the animal that caused the injury escaped from the control of the defendant keeper. This additional requirement is another example of the pervasive influence of **fault doctrine on the torts of strict liability**. The strict liability for dangerous animals is thereby adulterated by demanding a determination of the **reasonable care** of the keeper. 

The application of the scienter action to the modern phenomenon of a wildlife safari park where visitors drive among dangerous animals was clarified in ***Cowles v. Balac***, [2005 CanLII 2038 (ON SC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1jp6b){:target=" \_blank"}. In that case the automatic window of the plaintiff’s car was inadvertently lowered allowing a Bengal tiger to enter the vehicle and attack the occupants. The trial judge held that although the tiger was controlled within the boundaries of the park and the occupants of the vehicle were intended to be caged within their vehicle the tiger was, for the purposes of the scienter tort, **out of control and liability was imposed** for the serious injuries suffered. 

The rule of remoteness of damage in the scienter action has not been authoritatively established. The cases seem evenly divided between a **directness** rule and **foreseeability**. 

**(2) Defences**

Four of the defences, **default of the plaintiff**, **consent**, **trespass of the plaintiff**, and **illegality**, address common concerns and often overlap. 

**(a) Default of the Plaintiff**

There is no liability if the injury is the result of the plaintiff’s fault. It has been applied most frequently where the plaintiff entered an animal’s cage, came too close to the animal, or attempted to feed or pet the animal. Some of these situations may now be similarly resolved on the grounds that there has been no loss of control of the animal by the keeper. 

**(b) Consent**

Consent is established where the plaintiff has **voluntarily exposed** herself to the risk of injury by the animal. Placing oneself in harm’s way with knowledge of the danger posed by the animal is probably sufficient. 

In negligence law, the defence of voluntary assumption of risk has been restricted severely, and an agreement between the plaintiff and the defendant that the former accepts both the physical and the legal risk of injury must be established by the defendant. These **negligence principles do not appear to have intruded into the scienter action** as yet. 

**(c) Trespass by the Plaintiff**

There is no liability if the defendant was trespassing at the time of the injury. The defence, which is consistent with those of default of the plaintiff and consent, reflects the old common law rule that the occupier of premises is under no obligation to a trespasser other than not to intentionally or recklessly injure her. 

That minimal obligation to trespassers, however, no longer represents the law. At common law and under provincial occupier’s liability legislation, **the standard of care is**, in all but exceptional circumstances, **much higher**, being generally one of common humanity or reasonable care. 

**(d) Illegality (*Ex Turpi Causa Non Oritur Actio*)**

The conventional view is that the illegality of the plaintiff’s act is **a complete defence** to the scienter action. There is, however, generally no need to rely exclusively on the illegality defence in the scienter action. There is also doubt about the **current status of the illegality defence** because the Supreme Court has largely abolished the defence in respect of personal injury actions in negligence and intentional torts. It is not yet clear what effect that will have on the scienter action. 

**(e) Deliberate Act of a Stranger and Act of God**

Both defences require proof that the animal escaped because of an **intentional act of a stranger** or **a natural phenomenon** that was utterly unforeseeable and so could not reasonably be guarded against. The defences, therefore, operate to exculpate a defendant who can establish a complete lack of fault. 

**(3) Dogs**

At common law a dog is classified as a harmless animal (*mansuetae naturae*). A plaintiff must, therefore, establish that his injuries were caused by a dog that had **previously displayed a propensity** to cause such injuries and that the defendant keeper of the dog knew of its dangerous propensity. 

The legislation is not uniform. It commonly **relieves the plaintiff of the burden of proving** that the dog has previously shown a dangerous propensity about which the keeper knows. Ontario has taken the more straightforward approach of imposing **an express strict liability** for injuries caused by dogs, subject to a reduction in damages for the contributory negligence of the plaintiff.

**(4) The Scienter Action and Negligence**

The scienter action and negligence are not mutually exclusive causes of action. A plaintiff who is unsuccessful under the scienter action may still establish that her injuries were caused by the negligence of the keeper of the animal. Some judges seem to **prefer to use negligence principles**, particularly in the not infrequent cases where some apportionment of the loss reflecting the plaintiff’s contributory negligence appears to be appropriate.

**E. CATTLE TRESPASS**

**(1) Elements of Liability**

An owner of cattle is strictly liable for damage caused by the escape of his cattle onto land in the possession of the plaintiff. The term “cattle” has been defined expansively. It extends to most farm animals such as cows, sheep, goats, horses, pigs, and ducks. 

The plaintiff is, normally, **an occupier of neighbouring land** and the most common complaint is **damage to or destruction of crops**. **Liability does, however, extend** to other forms of damage which flow from the trespass, including damage to land, chattels, other animals, personal injury to occupiers, and, possibly, personal injury to non-occupiers. 

When cattle escape onto adjoining land while they are being driven along a highway or cause injury to motorists and passersby when they escape from adjoining land onto the highway, **liability must be established in negligence**. 

**(2) Defences**

There is no liability where the cattle escape onto the plaintiff’s land because of the **plaintiff’s negligence**. There is, however, no duty on the part of the plaintiff to fence her land to keep cattle out. Cattle trespass is based broadly on the **owner’s duty to fence cattle in**.

**Consent** to the intrusion of cattle is a complete defence.

It is **doubtful** that **deliberate act of a stranger** and **act of God** are applicable to cattle trespass, because the escape of fenced cattle is likely to arise from deliberate acts of strangers or from severe natural phenomena such as floods, ice storms, blizzards, and tornadoes.

**(3) Distress Damage Feasant**

In some situations, a self-help remedy is available to deal with cattle trespass. It is known as **distress damage feasant**. It empowers the plaintiff to impound the straying cattle and to hold them as **security for the damage** that has been caused by them. The cattle must be returned when compensation is paid.

**F. VICARIOUS LIABILITY**

Vicarious liability is not a discrete tort. It describes the responsibility that one person may have for the torts of another because of the relationship between them. Vicarious liability is described as strict because it **requires no proof of personal wrongdoing** by the person subject to it. 

It does not displace the personal liability of the tortfeasor. It merely provides the plaintiff with **an alternative defendant** who is more likely to be solvent, to have liability insurance, or to be able to spread the loss in some other way. 

The most common relationship giving rise to vicarious liability is that of **employer and employee**, or **principal and agent**. These two relationships may be contrasted with those of employer and independent contractor, parent and child, bailor and bailee, and trustee and beneficiary, which do not normally give rise to vicarious liability.

**(1) Employer and Employee (Master and Servant)**

An employer is strictly liable for the torts of their employees committed within the course of their employment. 

**(a) Employees and Independent Contractors**

The primary test to distinguish an employee from an independent contractor is the **control test**. 

**An employee** is a person who is under the direct control and supervision of the employer who is empowered to tell the employee how, when, and where to do the work. 

**Independent contractors** are not under the employer’s control. They are hired to complete a particular task and are controlled by the terms of their contract with the employer, not by the personal instructions of the employer. 

The **control test** is not, however, easy to apply in a modern economy. The control test has therefore been supplemented by other tests, the “entrepreneur test” and the “organization test”. 

The Supreme Court reviewed each of these approaches in ***671122 Ontario Ltd. v. Sagaz Industries Canada Inc.***, [2001 SCC 59](https://canlii.ca/t/51z6){:target=" \_blank"}. It concluded that there was no one conclusive test. The Court called for a close examination of the total relationship and an approach which synthesized many of the factors found in the various nominate tests. 

Occasionally the courts have had to address the problem of the “**borrowed servant**.” It arises where an employer allows another busi- ness to second temporarily one of its employees. There is a factual presumption that the general employer remains vicariously liable for the torts of the borrowed servant but **ultimately it is a question of who has control of the employee**.

The Supreme Court has, however, recently recognized that **an employee may have more than one employer**. In ***Blackwater v. Plint***, [2005 SCC 58](https://canlii.ca/t/1lsvn){:target=" \_blank"} both the federal government and a church were found to be the joint employers of an employee who abused a student in a residential school run by them.

**Remuneration** is **not an essential element** of an employment relation- ship for the purposes of vicarious liability. Volunteers working for charitable organizations, public institutions, and sporting associations may be employees.

**(b) The Course of Employment**

This requirement is captured by the rule that the **tort must have been committed in the course of employment**.

The phrase “course of employment” has not, however, been interpreted narrowly. It covers most tortious acts that are broadly **incidental** or **related** to the employment function. Any wrongful or unauthorized mode of carrying forward the employment function is normally within the course of employment.

The courts have addressed this issue by drawing a **distinction** between prohibitions about **how the work is to be done** and prohibitions about **what work is to be done**. Express prohibitions relating to the manner in which the work is to be done **do not insulate** the employer from vicarious liability. Prohibitions and directions that seek to define the sphere of employment or the nature of the task or work to be carried out will **normally protect the employer** from vicarious liability.

In ***Bazley v. Curry***, [1999 CanLII 692 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fqlw){:target=" \_blank"}, the Court chose to deemphasize the conventional terminology of “scope of employment” and “unauthorized modes of doing authorized tasks.” It favoured a **two-step approach**. 

- A court must first determine if the situation is controlled by unambiguous precedent, in which case it must be applied. 
- In the absence of such authority, the decision turns on policy considerations supporting vicarious liability generally, namely, the provision of a just and practical remedy and the deterrence of future harm.

**(2) Principal and Agent**

The relationship of principal and agent is one where the principal empowers the agent to act on her behalf in such a way as to affect her legal relationship with others. 

The general rule is that the principal is vicariously liable for the torts of her agent committed within the **scope of her actual or apparent authority**. 

Most of the cases involve **fraudulent misrepresentations** in respect of contracts entered into by agents but there are numerous cases dealing with a wide range of torts for which the principal has been held liable. Agency also forms the basis of liability in partnership law. **The partnership firm and all other partners are liable for the tortious acts of partners** acting in the ordinary course of the firm’s business or within the scope of their authority.

**(3) Statutory Vicarious Liability**

The rules of vicarious liability have been modified legislatively in respect of the **owners of motor vehicles**. The purpose is to extend the common law vicarious liability of the owner of the motor vehicle for the torts of employees who are driving the vehicle in the course of employment to **members of the owner’s family**, and in some provinces, to **any persons who are driving the motor vehicle with the owner’s consent**. 

**(4) Independent Contractors**

An independent contractor is normally a discrete business entity that is independent from the employer who hires it. A person who employs an independent contractor to perform services or undertake tasks on their behalf is **not**, therefore, ordinarily **liable** for the torts committed by the contractor carrying out the work. 

The employer may in exceptional circumstances be under a duty to check that the independent contractor has **liability insurance** to protect third parties.

There are some truly exceptional circumstances where the employer is subject to statutory and common law duties of care that are **non-deleg able**. In those circumstances, the work may be delegated to an independent contractor but the **employer remains fully responsible** for the failure of the contractor to take care in its performance.

The leading case on **non-delegable duties** is ***Lewis (Guardian ad litem of) v. British Columbia***, [1997 CanLII 304 (SCC)](https://canlii.ca/t/1fqw7){:target=" \_blank"}. In that case, the province argued that since the work was delegated to an independent contractor it was not liable. The Court disagreed holding that the province was under a non-delegable duty of care and was liable because **care had not been taken**.

Justice Cory focused on the **legislative provisions imposing various obligations on the defendant** and concluded that the legislation indicated that the duty to carry out maintenance on the highway was non-delegable. ***Lewis*** was read narrowly as a case that turned on the applicable statutory language at issue.

**(5) Liability of the Employee or the Agent**

The rules of vicarious liability in respect of employers and principals do **not prevent an action being brought against the employee or agent** personally. Moreover, the **doctrine of indemnification** allows an employer to seek reimbursement from an employee on whose behalf it has been found vicariously liable.

A similar result may arise from the fact that employers and employees and principals and agents are joint tortfeasors. This allows both to be sued and permits the employer or principal to seek **contribution** from the employee or agent tortfeasor under the applicable apportionment legislation. 

Indemnification and contribution claims against employees are likely to be **subrogated claims** brought in the name of the employer by the employer’s insurer to recoup the amount paid out under the policy of insurance. 

In ***Douglas v. Kinger***, [2008 ONCA 452](https://canlii.ca/t/1x5np){:target=" \_blank"}, the court criticized the indemnification rule and indicated that its survival was due more to the common practice of **insurers in refraining from exercising** it than to any sound policy foundation.

**(6) Direct Liability of Employers and Principals**

Vicarious liability does not exclude the direct and personal liability of an employer or principal for the breach of a personal duty owed directly to the plaintiff. Liability may arise, for example, where an employer has **authorized or instigated an employee to commit a tortious act**, or has failed to train or supervise an employee, or has requested that an employee carry out tasks that are beyond his abilities and expertise.

There is also the concept of a **negligent hiring**, which is more developed in the United States than it is in Canada.

**Chapter 6 NUISANCE**




























































 

